 

Husky brings to mind a noble arctic dog with the spirit and 
power of a wolf majestically running over a snowy, windswept 
landscape.  This is exactly the wrong husky for our story.  The 
husky I am referring to is corduroy or denim.  Husky is a 
size.  Husky was the name for the largest pants size for young 
boys. There is no wolf like spirit here; the closest thing is 
sweaty armpits and chafed legs.  
   Huskies were made from a treated fabric that would be 
pulled uncomfortably tight over pudgy frames.  The fabric 
would resist staining.  The fabric acted like a personal drop 
cloth for fat kids. It would resist spills of coke, cool-aid, and 
pasta sauce, as they trail from the mouths of over eager 
eaters.  Mothers can then simply wipe away the dribbles, from 
these errant gobbles and chews.   
   Huskies are for that special type of American child, the one 
who overindulges, the glandular, the big boned. And it was to 
this weighty child's mother, that department stores marketed 
the plus-size clothing line.  A mother buys Huskies for their 
child for practical reasons, not for aesthetic ones.   And it is the 
child who must suffer the indignity of the size, or wear it with 
pride.   This is the story of an unapologetic, heavyweight, 
Husky wearer, waddling over the landscape of a middle-
American town, above average in every way that is physically 
possible.
   
   Edwards is a street on the near south side of St. Louis. 
Missouri, a city founded in the late seventeen hundreds at the 
confluence of the Missouri and Mississippi rivers. Most people 
who are not from there, associate it with Huck Fin and his 
raft.   The city has several major league sports franchises, 
hockey, baseball and football, for which it is also widely 
known.   
   St. Louis has large Catholic and Jewish populations that it 
owes to nineteenth century immigration from Italy, Germany 
and Eastern Europe.  The 'Louis' in St. Louis is often 
pronounced 'Louie' by people living south of the old Mason 
Dixon line.  But none of the papists or Jews who actually live 
there would say 'Louie'. The Catholics, Jews, and almost 
everyone else who lives there, pronounce it 'Louis', in a 
distinctly northern way. 
   In the nineteenth century St. Louis was the fourth largest 
city in the United States. And during that gilded age the city was 
outfitted with beautiful public buildings and social resources as 
gifts from wealthy philanthropists, like the St. Louis library, Art 
Museum, Forest Park and the Symphony Orchestra.  
   The World's Fair was held there in 1904 and transformed a 
large part of the city's rural areas into a world stage for the 
exhibition of the emerging modern world.  
   When I was young my grandfather, Bud Whacker, used to 
tell me that just about every modern convenience was invented 
at the 1904 World's Fair.   Inventions such as ice cream cone 
and the hotdog bun were believable, but the paperclip, the 
garden-hose and the can-opener, what's more, the car window 
roller-upper and roller-downer, the club sandwich and the 
toothpicks used to hold that invention together, seemed, to me, 
a bit too much. Think of some invention, anything, a soda 
bottle top or copper wire, for example, Grandpa would 
proudly say it was invented at the worlds fair. 
   The 1904 World's Fair left a powerful lasting impression on 
the city, a high water mark of cosmopolitan possibility and 
importance.   
   The twentieth century was less kind to St. Louis.  It saw its 
population slip to the ranks of the 52nd city in America.  And 
far from being a world stage, it became more of a quaint 
museum, with a few bright spots of culture supported and 
protected from ubiquitous social ills and urban decline.   
   This cultural St. Louis was a world physically close to 
Edwards street, in the south side of the city, but conceptually 
far from my world, which consisted of a two-story converted 
duplex at 2015 Edwards.  This two-story building on a small 
lot in a dying city in the Midwest marks my origin. This 
building formed my original celestial sphere; a young boy's 
universe constructed of red brick.   This small world of mine 
was situated in the little Italy section the city bordering both the 
Irish and Jewish quarters.  
   For most of my young life there was just five people living 
at Edwards, my mother, sister, grandmother and grandfather 
and me. The Edwards house was built just after the World's 
Fair as were many of the buildings in the surrounding ethnic 
neighborhoods.  The bricks of these buildings were reclaimed 
from temporary structures used for the World's Fair 
exhibition.  Some of the bricks were glazed with different 
colors and were smooth to the touch like semi-opaque ancient 
glass.  I have a lasting tactile memory of feeling the smooth 
glaze on the bricks of our house.   The glazed bricks were 
gathered together in batches of mismatched colors, like a 
patchwork quilt over the buildings of the ethnic 
neighborhoods. These bricks often formed a beautiful color 
pallet that, I believe, was most elegantly demonstrated in the 
brick shed in the back yard of our Edwards house.
   The ethnic neighborhoods shared these glazed bricks as a 
meager but fitting family inheritance from the World's Fair. But 
that is perhaps just a small part of the Fair's impact on these 
neighborhoods, which were built in the shadow of the great 
exhibition. There was no shortage of colorful stories.  St. 
Louisans called the Irish neighborhood dog town, and not out 
of some ethnic slight against the Irish.  Rather, to hear my 
grandpa tell it, it's an ethnic slight against the Chinese.
   Grandpa maintained that a group of primitive Chinese 
people were displayed at the World's Fair. But the exhibitions 
ran out of money and they had to cut the Chinese loose, 
instead of sending them back home.     
   
    You know let them out of their cages.  Grandpa said.
   
    Cages, Grandpa?  I replied 
   
    OK  maybe not cages but some sort of hut or other kind 
of enclosure. The important thing is the fair organizers just let 
them fend for themselves.  
    Now Greg,  Grandpa continued,   do you know what 
Chinese people eat?  
   
    No, Chinese food?  I said imagining something like cat 
food.  
   
    Chinese food!  Grandpa retorted, irritated by the 
tautology,   No, son, they eat dogs. 
   
    Dogs?  I answered quizzically,   No they don't, Grandpa. 
They couldn't. 
   
    Yes, son, they would eat Rover or Spot.  They eat dogs just 
as we eat pigs.  And you'd probably eat the neighbors' dog too, 
if Grandma were late with your lunch. 
   
    Grandpa that's mean,  I complained but deep down 
suspected it to be true.
   
    So, as I was saying,  Grandpa continued,  they let these 
Chinese guys go fend for themselves right in the city as if it 
was in their jungle home.   
    Back then things were different, the city did not have all 
these buildings and highways. They had just invented all that 
crap at the Worlds Fair so it didn't quite circulate yet.
    So these Chinese guys holed up in some trees and bushes 
right near where Paddy's pub is now, on the south side of the 
park.
    You know Paddy's, they got the burger you like. 
   
    Yes, Grandpa, just near the park. 
   
    So they holed up there in some trees. But they were getting 
hungry and they didn't have no money, no Chinese money, or 
real money. 
   
    What did they do Grandpa? 
   
    They made arrows and bows out of stuff just lying 
around,  Grandpa continued,  like from the trees and garbage.
     I guess it was the head Chinese guy that had the plan.  He 
was thinking, that if you give a man a fish he eats for a 
day.  But the river was like seven miles away, and they didn't 
have fishing poles, they had arrows. So, the head Chinese guy 
instructs them to hunt dogs. 
   
    Dogs! How did they eat them?
   
    The Chinese guys hunt them and then the Chinese ladies 
skin, and cook them.
    But you're not getting the story boy,  Grandpa continued, 
now, somewhat frustrated.
     This ain't a recipe, fatty.  I am trying to tell you a story 
about ingenuity and hard work.  
    It's about the railroads, laundry and about those funny hats 
you see 'em wearing.
   Grandpa put his hands to the corner of his eyes and gave a 
big smile and said in an accent,  ancient Chinese secret.  
   
    Ancient Chinese secret,  I parroted in reply.
   
    Now, Greg, where do you think they found the dogs?  
Grandpa questioned pedagogically. 
   
    Dog houses, maybe?  I replied.
   
    Yes, Greg, dog houses, in back yards, that's a good start. 
But are you going to feed the whole Chinese community that 
way. 
   
    No, I guess not,  I answered.  
   
    You ain't thinking boy,  Grandpa said, harshly correcting 
me.  You got to use strategy, like a general. What is it that dogs 
want? 
   
    Bones, maybe?  I answered cautiously
   
    Yes, bones,  but what else?  Grandpa asked again.
   
    Dog houses,  I answer returning to my previous thought. 
   
    Get off that already, Greg.  What dogs want are cats.  
   
    Cats, Grandpa? 
   
    Yes, cats,  Grandpa stated authoritatively. 
    So this is what they do. These Chinese guys stay holed up 
in those woods.  Now they made their arrows. And remember, 
that they're half naked, mind you.  Now these Chinese guys 
came on down here to little Italy were we live now. 
   
    Why's that?  I asked.
   
    We'll you know how your Grandma, is a Dago 
WOP.  That's an Italian immigrant without papers.  Get it W. 
O. P.
    Well, Greg, you know what Dago WOPs eat? 
   
    Spaghetti,  I replied.
   
    No, Greg, they eat roof-rabbits, or what we call them in 
plain English, cats.  
   
    Oh, grandpa no, it can't be. 
   
    That's the honest truth,  Grandpa continued. 
    These Chinese guys came down and stole some of the 
Dago WOPs' cats and used them for traps, to catch dogs.  
    The Chinese guys tied the cats to a tree with transparent 
sausage casing, and waited on the dogs in the trees. The dogs 
were up-wind and get the smell of the cats. And then BLAM! 
The Chinese shot the dogs with arrows.  
   
    The Chinese used the Italian's cats to trap dogs,  I said,  it 
all sounds so sad.  
    Now you got it, Son,  Grandpa said, patting me on the 
head.  It was a more barbaric time. And you know that created 
the longstanding mistrust between the Italians and the Chinese, 
that is, until the Irish moved in. 

 
So my childhood home was this red brick, two-story building, 
built just after the 1904 Worlds Fair. It was positioned on the 
east side of Edwards street, in the middle of a small city 
block.  An alley ran along the south end of the house.  The 
alley was like a country road misplaced in the middle of the city, 
a relic left partially paved with weeds and wildflowers growing 
12 inches on either side.  
   The two-story house was remarkably small.  Not even 30 
feet from front door to back door, and less than 25 feet from 
side to side. It was originally intended to be a 4 family flat, so it 
had two doors on the first and second floor.  Each floor was 
cut into four pieces, which made four rooms, two bedrooms, a 
kitchen and a living room.   Indoor plumbing and bathrooms 
were put in just before my grandparents moved in.  The 
original intention of 4 families living in just two rooms a piece 
with no plumbing or bathrooms always seemed quite 
rough.  Knowing that, somehow, made this place seem like a 
castle, as our one family was living where 4 families had lived 
before.
   The building was tall and box-like. It had a flat roof.  But it 
was certainly not square to precision.  The tall walls of the 
house seemed to be in a slow-motion sway, when viewed from 
the sidewalk.  I am not sure whether this was an optical illusion 
of perspective or poor craftsmen-ship, I suspect a bit of both.
   There were first and second story stone and concrete 
balconies that ran the length of the front side of the 
house.  They were merely three feet wide but each of the four 
front doors had access to them.  The ornamental white 
sandstone was so soft, as children, we could easily clear out a 
gash after 10 minutes of rubbing.  Sometimes I would sit on 
the front porch soaking in the morning sun sitting next to my 
mother who was cat napping in a folding chair. I would sit and 
feel the sandy residue beneath my toes and working small 
indentation into the facade of the building. 
   The only problem was that the second floor balcony by 
design or accident leaned toward the street, and gave the 
impression that you could easily fall to the street below.  A 
three-foot tall black metal railing was the only protection.  I was 
often cautioned not to lean against the railing, heavy as I was, 
as it seemed to be loosely attached to the stone pillars with 
rusty metal screws, some of which had already broken free 
from the crumbling sandstone.
   I would safely survey my neighborhood hugging one of the 
sandstone pillars for balance. You could see clear to the next 
street, over the one-story houses in our neighborhood.  When 
I stood there I felt as if I was up in the aether.  From that 
rarefied air you could launch a paper airplane clear down the 
block if you folded it really well.
   Across the street was a single story sausage making plant.  It 
was started by and catered to the Italian immigrants in the 
neighborhood.  There were no windows facing us, just white 
cinderblock walls with a black tar roof. During the summer the 
smell of the meat curing was only overpowered by an 
occasional coating of fresh tar on its roof.
   Power lines, suspended on tall wooden posts, ran up and 
down the block.  Fat electric cables and thin phone lines 
connecting and crisscrossing all of the neighborhood 
homes.  Leaning, like I wasn't supposed to, I could almost 
touch one of the lines, a big post was less than two feet from 
the tip of my chubby little finger.   
   These lines may have been intended just to carry power, but 
their other use seemed far more natural and exotic.  It is what 
we called squirrel highway. 
   
   Grandpa took me outside. We'd left the back gate and 
walked up the alley to the front of the house.  We were facing 
east looking at the front of the house. He told me to look up. 
Just to the right of our house was a tall electrical pole a good 12 
feet above our porch. To the left of our house  was another 
electrical pole just as high, with clunky ceramic resistors and 
hulking electrical capacitors. 
   As we were on the corner of the alley, we were a hub for the 
neighborhood power grid. That powerful electrical grid 
connected the East and West of the neighborhood. It had two 
thick heavy black wires, and stood just 6 feet above our porch. 
Four feet above those wires, ran a second smaller series of 
cables. Grandpa told me those were for the telephone. 
   Squirrels would run up and down the poles, over the lines, 
jumping from tier to tier, from crowded thick cables to thin 
telephone lines.  The squirrels would exit at trees, jumping onto 
branches, or exit at buildings, jumping onto roofs,  or even exit 
on our porch.
   
    Now boy,  he said,  see that pole?  
   
    Yes, Grandpa.  
   
    When you're upstairs with your mother, while she does her 
nails, don't you ever lean over and try to touch those wires.  
   
    Yes, Grandpa.  
   
    They will fry you sure as anything,  he said, now, patting 
me on my round tummy.  And you would fry up real nice, 
apple in your mouth and everything.  
   
    Cut it out, Grandpa.  
   
    But Greg, I just wanted to tell you that I know your 
mother's been doing her nails a lot.  And staying out late at 
night, too.  I just want to let you know that this is normal. 
   
    It's OK,  I said,  I like staying downstairs with you, on 
nights Mom stays out. 
   
    Greg, I want to tell you about Squirrel Highway. Now you 
know how those squirrels run back and forth along those 
wires. They can cross any direction in the city. The squirrels can 
go up north to Jewish town. They can go down south with the 
Dutch. They can even travel far north and be with the neighbors, 
but I don't think these squirrels want to do that.
    Now I'm telling you a story about a certain girl squirrel, 
who lived on squirrel highway. This squirrel had a big fluffy tail. 
It was a real pretty color, kind of brown and little red. It was 
like your mother's hair before she died it blond.  
   
    Yes, I remember, Grandpa, real pretty she called it all burn 
hair, which sounds kind of bad to me. 
   
    That's right Greg. This auburn haired squirrel had a real 
nice family. She had a mother that went to squirrel mass almost 
every day. But this auburn haired squirrel like to run about. The 
mother and father squirrel sent her off to squirrel college, so 
she could find a good squirrel husband and maybe even a 
decent job so she could bring home some nuts. But, this 
auburn haired squirrel met a sad gray squirrel that she thought 
had a lot of potential. This gray squirrel was going to be a 
squirrel doctor, taking care of a lot of sick squirrels. She and her 
squirrel parents thought this squirrel doctor was going to have 
a lot of nuts. 
    They'd both came running home on holidays. When the 
squirrel father met this gray squirrel doctor, he thought the gray 
squirrel looked a bit different. His nose was much longer and 
bigger. Kind of like your nose, pudgy.  Grandpa said, tweaking 
my nose. 
   
    Cut it out, Grandpa,  I said, pushing his hand away and 
looking up at the power lines, looking out for other squirrels 
darting across them.
   
    This gray squirrel's nose was long and thin, with a black tip 
that darted back and forth every time food was put on the 
table. The squirrel father thought the gray squirrel's beady eyes, 
made him look like he was planning something.  And one time 
when the auburn squirrel, the gray squirrel and her parents were 
all sitting around the table talking about tails, they all of a 
sudden set on what was so different about the gray squirrel. 
That gray squirrels tail was bald as your bare ass. 
   
    But, Grandpa, squirrels have bushy tails. 
   
    Not this one Son. This tail was bald and segmented, like 
some kind of worm. It was, really, really, ugly.
   
    Grandpa, that's a rat! 
   
    Well done Boy, you're not as stupid as the auburn squirrel.  
While patting me on the shoulder, Grandpa quietly remarked, 
 I hate to think who you get that from. 
   
    What's that, Grandpa? 
   
    Never mind, Son. Back to the story.
    So the auburn squirrel and a  the gray squirrel, or rat, get 
married. And It turns out that the rat is not yet a full squirrel 
doctor. He still has a lot of work to do. And he doesn't bring 
any nuts, whatsoever, back home. He even borrows nuts from 
the auburn squirrel's parents.
    So the auburn squirrel is working really hard.  And one day, 
a couple of squirrel babies come along.  One real fat one and a 
real skinny one. The fat one would eat a lot of nuts too which 
made for more pressure. 
    At this time, there is a big rodent war going on, far way 
from these squirrels' part of squirrel highway. So the rat goes 
off to the rodent war.  The auburn squirrel and her children 
move in with her squirrel parents.  
   
    Where is the rodent war, Grandpa? 
   
    Far away, Boy, where all the squirrels have different color 
skin, and low morals. 
   
    Do the squirrels use guns? 
   
    Yes, Boy, of course they use guns.  But the moral of this 
tale is that, this rat won't ever be coming home on squirrel 
highway.
    I know how you look out that window and how you sit on 
the porch, with your mother, with her painted nails, and 
bleached blond hair.  Just remember, when you're watching 
those squirrels run up and down the thick black power lines, 
that the bald tailed rat is never going to come back home. 
   
 
My childhood home at 2015 Edwards was situated on a small 
lot. It was a rectangle just 55 feet long and 25 feet wide.  There 
was no front yard. The front of the building sat directly against 
the sidewalk and street. The left side of the lot bordered a half-
paved alley, with weeds and wild flowers poking up through 
crumbling asphalt.
   There were three round trash cans set toward the far end of 
the lot. The back of the lot bordered a grass alley. This alley 
was unpaved and had dandelions and other weeds were 
growing unchecked.
    The house took up half of the lot, with the remainder left 
to a small back yard.  Yards like this were commonly referred 
to as  postage stamp  yards, owning to their diminutive size.  A 
brick shed stood at the far end of the yard. 
   The shed was our lot's finest example of glazed bricks, 
reclaimed from the World's Fair.  All of the bricks used to 
make the shed were remarkable for diversity.  The shed had 
patches of deep greens, with dashes of reds, neighbors, browns, 
and even the odd bright yellow brick. It was a tiny, but sturdy 
structure, almost a perfect cube. 
   It was a mere 10 by 10 foot building. It had one window on 
the back wall with plywood covering the glass. And, yet, even 
with the plywood, there was a blind hung over the 
window.  The blind was open, and its metal louvers had been 
collecting dust for several generations. 
   There was a large green door that smelled of mildew. Long 
chips of green paint were peeling off its soggy wood.  This 
door was held shut with a large padlock.  I remember being 
just tall enough to open it on my own, if I wanted to lend a 
hand to my grandmother.   When the door was open the smell 
of mildew intensified, and mixed with the smell of tar, paint 
and oil, from long forgotten household projects. 
   There was very little light in the shed, as the only window 
was blocked, and it had no electric lights.  The only light came 
from the doorway. I would cast a shadow as I peered in.  I 
could just barely see the wooden beams of the roof. They 
looked as if they were railroad ties.   Strips of tar paper slipped 
through the joints of the wooden beams, making an outline 
that could easily be mistaken for a hanging bat.  On the right 
side of the shed was a large deep shelf that held most of the 
smaller tools and seemed to be home to every sort of bug and 
creepy crawly. 
   On the left side of the back wall there were the remains of 
the stove pipe which outlasted the wood stove which had long 
since been removed.  Spiders spun large webs at the end of 
this pipe, catching the few flies that found their way down the 
now blocked chimney. The shed floor was concrete.  Tools, 
bicycles and the lawn mower were kept on the five feet of 
remaining floor space. 
   
   Grandma would cut the small lawn with a push lawn 
mower.  It had a cylinder of cork-screw blades attached to two 
small wheels.  The wheels were so old they reminded me of 
wagon wheels. The handle was little more than a modified 
shovel handle.  I would often take the lawn mower out for her, 
trying to make myself useful.
   
    Greg, bring out the rake and the scissors. And hurry up, 
on account it's going to rain.  Grandma said.
   
   I dragged the lawn mower behind me, its blade ratcheting 
harmlessly as it free-wheeled. I carried the rake and the scissors 
in my chubby right hand.
    Can I mow the lawn, Grandma? 
   
    OK Greg, but you gotta run over those dandy lions two or 
three times,  they just lay down and wilt, tricking you into 
thinking they're cut.  But just when you turn your back, there 
they go popping up again. 
   
   I ran the mower over the weeds, pulling it back and forth 
several times.  Grandma took the scissors and started to 
manicure the lawn,  snipping at the edges where the lawn met 
the concrete.  These were not some sort of specialized 
gardening tool but, regular scissors that you might use to cut 
paper.
   
    Hold up Greg, we got some good dandy lions here. 
   
   I stopped mowing.  Grandma got down on her hands and 
knees and started picking at the weeds.  Her body made an 
odd shape on the lawn.  Her curly white hair was all you could 
see of her head, as she bent face-down, pulling up the tender 
young dandelions.  Her backside stuck up in the air, and the 
two tails from her long coat fell backwards onto her back.  She 
looked as if she were a giant bunny rabbit with a fluffy white 
tail and a fat black face. 
   
    How about these over here, Grandma?  I said pointing out 
other dandelions.
   
    No, they ain't no good, if they got a flower 
already.  They're too tough even if you stew 'em. 
   
   She collected the weeds and set them in a pile in front of 
her.  Still kneeling, she fixed her jacket.  She took an empty 
Wonder Bread bag out of her pocket. She shook the bag.  It 
caught a gust of wind, and opened.  The bright circles of color 
on the Wonder Bread bag made a stark contrast to Grandma's 
dreary black outfit.  She looked as if she were a nun carrying a 
golden chalice or gilded bible. She, then, picked up the weeds 
and began to fill the Wonder Bread bag.
   
    OK Greg, that's about all the dandy lions in our yard.  You 
finish up here, I am going back to the grass alley and see If I 
can find enough dandy lions to round out a salad for dinner.  
   
   I continued cutting the lawn. The wind was picking up and 
the sky turning gray.  The shed door was still open and the 
grass cuttings were being blown back into the dark, dank shed.
   
    Greg where's Grandma gone to?  Grandpa said, sticking 
his head out the back of the house.
   
    She's in the alley looking for dandelions, for salad. 
   
    Damn, woman!  Grandpa shouted toward the alley as he 
walked into the yard.
    Why you gotta pick weeds for dinner. Why can't we eat 
normal vegetables, like white people. You don't have to go 
picking on the ground. Dogs shit there. 
   
    Shut up Bud,   she said while walking farther down the 
grass alley, to a particularly bushy bunch of weeds.
   
    Hey Son,  Grandpa said to me,   your grandma's got a big 
butt.  That's where you get if from,  her side.   He patted me 
on the stomach,  No wonder you eat so much candy, with her 
feeding you weeds. 
   
    I like them, Grandpa. 
   
    Shit, kid, you'll eat anything that won't eat you first. 
   
    Mary,  Grandpa shouted,  get your ass back here, it's 
starting to rain. 
   
   Grandpa took the lawn mower out of my hand and kicked 
the blades with his leather shoes. The  cylindrical blade 
freewheeled backward and the thin blades of grass and long 
dandelion stems flew off.  He then put the mower back into 
the shed.
   
    Greg, Bring the rake, it's raining now.  
   
   Distant thunder reverberated. Grandma walked back into 
the yard leaving the metal gate swinging behind her, her 
Wonder Bread bag full of fresh dandelions.
   I drug the rake behind me and set it in the shed,   Grandpa 
took the key out of my hand,  pausing to look into the shed, as 
the light faded.  He gazed into the darkness, as if trying to 
remember something.  I stood next to him trying to look 
where he was looking, trying to stand as he was standing, all 
the while, smelling his strong after-shave mixed with, grass 
cuttings, mildew, oil and paint. 
   
    You know what this used to be, do you?  Grandpa said, 
after a long pause.
   
    What, what used to be? 
   
    What the shed used to be. 
   
    No, Grandpa. 
   
   He points to the back of the shed,  Look at that, on the 
window,  that's a venetian blind. This used to be a venetian 
blind factory. 
   
    What kind of factory? 
   
    A venetian blind factory,  He repeated.    Do you know 
how to make a Venetian blind? 
   
    A venetian blind,   I said pointing to the blind covering the 
boarded-up window.   No, It looks kinda complicated. 
Grandma doesn't like me playing with the living room blinds.  
   
    Oh forget it. Get in the house. It's starting to rain. 
Sometimes you are stupider than I imagine. But wait, tell me, 
Greg, who's buried in Grant's tomb. 
   
    I don’t know. Is it someone famous?  I replied.
   
    Get in the house, and check on your sister! 
   
   I ran across the freshly mowed lawn and up the back 
steps.  The back of the house had a porch and balcony like the 
front, so I was now protected from the rain. The sky was 
almost green as Grandpa finished locking the shed.  He was 
wearing a hat, like he always did. He locked the door and 
Grandma had walked beside him. She gave him a kiss on the 
cheek.  He hugged her, and after breaking free from the 
embrace, slapped her on the butt.  She was carrying the wonder 
bread bag full of young dandelions.  She had turned up her 
collar, as the rain started to come down more heavily.  She 
followed me, running up to the porch. Grandpa walked more 
slowly.  The heavy drops of rain  were bouncing off his narrow 
brimmed hat and black trench coat.  
   Grandpa was a short man. He was bowlegged from 
malnutrition as a child.  He was a skinny man,  who seemed to 
carry all his strength in his forearms and hands. His shoulders 
were narrow and his back was slightly bent.   I thought he 
walked like a cowboy.  He had straight gray hair that came to a 
pronounced widow's peak on his forehead.  He had a long 
crooked nose, kind eyes and a mouth that was most often 
turned in a smile.
   After grandpa came up to the porch we all enter the house 
through the back door. I  ran through the kitchen, straight into 
the living room where Angela was laying on the floor watching 
TV on a large black and white television that was already a 
museum piece.  The picture was stretched at the sides, as the 
picture tube was rounded like a small section of a sphere.  
   Angela was two years younger than me.
   She was resting her head on her hands laying on the living 
room rug, her small frame in skinny red corduroy pants and a 
white t-shirt with blue piping.  I ran in and kicked her foot. 
Then ran to the window and started playing with the blinds.  
   
    Cut it out Greg! 
   
    Hey, Angela, look at this,  I said, pulling on the blinds, 
quickly opening and closing them.  This is a Venetian blind.  
Sh-wing, sh-wing. 
   
    So what, who cares? You're not supposed to play with 
that. Grandma's going to spank you. 
   
   Sh-wing, sh-wing, I continued opening and closing them. Sh-
wing, sh-wing.
   
    Angela did you know, that the shed used to be a Venetian 
blind factory.   I bet you don’t know how to make a venetian 
blind? 
   
    Who cares? Its just a stupid blind. Greg you're a dipstick 
dork. 
   
    But look how well it works,  I insisted.   Do you think the 
string goes up inside that top part?  I say moving a chair 
toward the window too get a better look at the blind's 
workings. Sh-wing, sh-wing.   
   
    What time is mom coming home tonight?  Angela asked, 
completely ignoring my investigation of the blinds.  I want to 
go upstairs to our house.  (The bottom four rooms of the 
house were Grandpa's and Grandma's The top four rooms 
was where my mother, my sister and I lived.)
   
    I don't know,  I replied.  She's working.   Sh-wing, sh-wing. 
   
    Get down from there! And wash your hands, you little 
ragamuffin. You're getting dirt all over the window sill. And 
look at your feet.  
   Grandma smacked me on the butt. I ran to the bathroom.   
    And you, little, lazy princess,  she continued, addressing 
Angela,  help me in the kitchen. 
   
   As Angela passed the bathroom door she stuck her tongue 
out at me.  
   The bathroom was small, less than four feet wide and six 
feet long. It had a cast iron tub with animal feet and a white, 
glazed basin, which grandma would scrub with dry green 
detergent after every bath.   The bathroom was done in black 
and white tile, and it had a toilet that sat so high, my feet would 
barely hit the floor.
   
   I followed them into the kitchen. Grandpa was sitting at the 
kitchen table reading the paper and drinking a cup at of coffee 
that grandma pored from the peculator.   
   
    So Grandpa tell Angela about the Venetian blind factory,  I 
said, sitting down at the kitchen table across from Grandpa.
   
    Bud are you telling stories again?  Grandma said as while 
cleaning the dandelions in the sink.
   
    I don’t care about a dumb old factory,  Angela said.
   
    Here dear, cut up these carrots,   Grandma said to 
Angela,   but careful that knife is sharp. 
   
   Grandpa remained quiet behind his news paper.
   
    I want to make a Venetian blind,  I said, proudly.   It 
doesn't look too hard.   Can I use your tools? 
   
    Shut up, Greg! You're such a dork, blinds are stupid.  I like 
curtains. 
   
    You’re the dork Angela. I could make one I could make 
one. Curtains are for girls. Blinds are cool tell her Grandpa. Tell 
her about the shed, tell her that it used to be a factory, tell her! 
   
    Damn, Boy!  Grandpa said putting the paper 
down,   You're too fidgety.  Calm down and I'll  tell you about 
the factory. 
   
    Oh Bud, you can go on all day, can’t you,  Grandma 
interjected.
   
    Well, Greg, you know we moved to this house when your 
mother was just a sweet auburn haired girl.  Long before she 
went blond.  And long before you were a sparkle in your 
father's beady eyes.  
   
    Bud, please!  Grandma interrupted.  Just, tell him about 
the blinds. 
   
    OK. Now listen, when we moved here, there was not a 
single thing over any of the windows. The sun would come 
streaming through during the day. And at night the street lights, 
and the car head lights would shine through. Grandma did try 
to sew some curtains.  They were real pretty to hang in the 
window, but curtains can only do so much, especially in the 
summer.
    We were still moving in and hadn't explored the place 
yet.  The house was dirty and I had just got my job at 
McDonald Douglass, and Grandma was busy taking care of 
your mother and her older sister and brother.   
   
    You mean Aunt Betty and Uncle Bill? 
   
    That's right Greg. We had just opened up the shed. There 
wasn't much in there, no bikes or lawn mower,  just some 
burlap sacks covering something on the shelf.  What do you 
think we found? 
   
    Spiders? 
   
    Well, hell yes, spiders! But that’s not the important 
part.  What do you think we found? Think  a bit this time, 
Greg.   
   
    Venetian blinds, Grandpa 
   
    Give this boy a treat, Mary, he's beginning to think a 
little.  Yes, venetian blinds. Enough for every window in the 
house, even the bathroom windows.  How many windows is 
that? 
   
    Um lets see there's the downstairs living room, kitchen, 
bedroom,  well a that’s...  I said, counting slowly on my fingers.
   
    It's 18,  Angela said confidently.  18 windows in the whole 
house, upstairs and down stairs.  She then continued cutting 
up carrots with a butter knife
   
    See your little sister is sharper than you are, tubby. 
   
    Tubby! That's for sure,  Angela repeated
   
    Shut up! Monkey face.  I said directed at Angela.
   
    Now Greg don't go disturbing your sister when she is 
using a knife she might cut herself.  Grandma said.
   
    So we find 18 Venetian blinds,  Grandpa continued,  and 
they're covered in a burlap sack. Just the right number to fit 
over all the windows in the house. And we also find a lot of 
spare louvers.   
   
    Found a lot of spare what?  I said.
   
    Louvers kid, you know what a louver is? 
   
    What, Grandpa? 
   
    The louver is part of a blind, and it ain't the cord. 
   
    The flat things that go up and down, Grandpa? 
   
    Yes, another word for them is slats.  Now Greg, there is a 
lot of art in a louver.   And in the shed we found a bunch of 
louvers, made of all different kinds of materials.  And there was 
this manuscript.  Like a note book with all sorts of crazy 
designs. But at the time I didn't think much of it. 
   
    Bud, what are you going on about,  Grandma interjects. 
   
    After we moved in,  Grandpa continued,  I met with some 
Italians who had been in the neighborhood for years. They 
told me about the crazy guy who used to live in our shed. He 
was from Italy just like the rest of the WOPs in this 
neighborhood.   
    Greg can you guess what city he was from, remember we 
are talking about venetian blinds? 
   
    Maybe, Rome, like the Pope.   
   
    No not like the pope,  Grandpa corrected,  this man was 
from Venice. He comes to St. Louis around the time of the 
Worlds Fair and starts his business.  This man always wore a 
big hat because he doesn't like the sun.  
    Back in Italy this man in the big hat, spent all his time in 
fancy museums looking at pictures of fat naked 
ladies.   Because back in Italy, especially in those days, they had 
nothing but fat ladies.  Your grandma would have made a 
good fat lady, if she stayed in Italy.  
   
    Be quiet Bud,  Grandma said.
   
    Greg's never seen a naked lady, cause he's a big dork,  
Angela interjects.
   
    Have too! 
   
    Have not! Mom doesn't count. 
   
    That doesn't matter Greg,  Grandpa said interrupting the 
name calling,  there is plenty of time for naked ladies.   
    But this man from Venice, who wore a big hat,  had a 
problem. In St Louis, at that time, people did not like nudity, 
like they did in Europe.  They would wear, maybe, two or three 
layers of clothes. They would even put clothes on statutes, if it 
showed too much leg and other bits. 
   
    Really Grandpa? 
   
    It's true.  They covered all the statues with flowing robes, 
until a good old naked Venus would look like the virgin Mary. 
   
    I think Mary is beautiful, like a princes,  Angela said.
   
    So this man from Venice who wore a big hat because he 
didn't like the sun, starts manufacturing Venetian blinds, right 
here in our shed.  But he also mixes in his other interest-- 
naked ladies. 
   
    Oh Bud what on earth are you going on about? 
   
    It was your Uncle Bill that discovered this,  Grandpa 
continued.  Grandma, here, doesn't  know about it. 
   
    Of course I don't Bud.  
   
    Tell us! Grandpa, tell us!  Angela and I shouted.
   
    Your Uncle Bill uncovered a bunch of louvers.  And these 
louvers were sort of odd, in that they were white on one side 
but had some kind of colors on the other.   
    Now one by one you couldn't tell that those louvers made 
up a picture. But your Uncle Bill was a patient boy who also has 
some interest in puzzles and naked ladies. 
    He found that if you make a Venetian blind with those 
louvers, when you fully close it, you get a picture of a naked 
lady, but when open it is hidden.  
   
    Where is it Grandpa? I want to see it! 
   
    We don't have that thing, anymore.  And good thing too, 
because looking at a picture like that is not good for your eyes. 
    In fact, that's what happened to that man from Venice.  He 
spent so much time closing the binds and looking at naked 
ladies, that he lost his sight. 
   
    How about Uncle Bill? 
   
    Well, luckily, I took it away from him before that could 
happen. It just goes to show you that there is more than one 
way to make a Venetian blind. 
   
    








4 ITALIAN CREAM BREAD


At the end of our block was a bakery,  Missouri Bakery.   It was 
one of two other, two story brick buildings on our block.   The 
two story bakery and our two story house seemed to form 
bookends for the one story houses shelved on the south side 
of the block. I always thought our house had some special 
affinity with Missouri Bakery because of the two story-ness and 
of course the red bricks.  
   But the most powerful motivation for regarding the bakery 
as special was not this architectural similarity, but the fact that 
they made food. 
   The specialty of the Bakery was the Italian bread.  They 
called it cream bread.  I don't think it had milk in it.  But that 
did not stop the Jewish in-laws from pausing before taking a 
bite being concerned of Kosher law of dairy and meat when 
eating an Italian sandwich.   
   This cream bread had a golden brown crust and seemed 
quite firm, but was in fact light and fluffy inside. Sometimes a 
slice would have large pockets of nothingness under the 
crust.  I would feel cheated when I could see my 
salami  peeking through.  
   When we bought this cream bread, we always bought it 
sliced. In its sliced form, it was almost as malleable as grocery 
store Wonder Bread. It lacked, however, the colors and fan fair 
of the Wonder Bread bag.   
   
   While Grandma was in the basement, doing the laundry, 
while, Grandpa was napping in his chair, and while Angela was 
laying on the brown carpeting watching TV, I would sneak into 
the kitchen.  
   The kitchen had a counter made of plywood and covered 
with cheap material that is supposed to look like marble. The 
same fake marble covered the kitchen floor.  Grandma used to 
call it linoleum. (I would often confuse linoleum for oleo which 
was some kind of artificial butter. Grandma's house was like a 
reserve for endangered words.)
   Across the linoleum floor sat a large gas stove. It was the 
kind with four burners and a griddle under the hood, for 
special pancake days.  
   Next to the stove sat the earliest from of an automatic dish 
washer. It had a bread box sitting on top, stocked with Italian 
cream Bread and Wonder Bread. 
   The dish washer was on wheels. When it was loaded with 
dirty dishes, Grandma would move its butt-end up to the sink. 
Then, like some pornographic kitchen gesture, Grandma would 
have to pull out its long hose, and with two hands attach it to 
the sink faucet.   
   Next to the dish washer was the real hearth of the 
house.  Traditionally, this was the stove. More modernly, it 
could be argued that the TV is the nexus of family 
interaction.  But to a ten year old fat kid, the fridge is really the 
hearth.  Grandma's fridge was that special color green shared 
by many appliances in the seventies.  
   I never entered or left the kitchen without opening the 
fridge and looking inside at the food, which was there for 
picking.  The fridge held blocks of Velveeta Cheese,  tubs of 
butter, and glass jars of jelly.  There were apples, peanut butter 
and lunch meat.  It held baloney and the richest of the 
childhood meats, braunschweiger.    
   My chubby hands and food gathering reflexes had been 
honed, to the point where I could deftly open the fridge,  scan 
for the best target,  snag some slice of ham or salami, scoop a 
finger full of peanut butter or mayonnaise, and shut the fridge, 
before being scolded.   
   Then kicking the fridge door shut with my right foot, I 
would hold the spoils in my right hand. With my left hand, I 
would open the bread box that sat on top of the promiscuous 
dishwasher, and pull out a slice of the most convenient bread, 
which was more often than not the Italian cream bread.  I 
would, then, fill the  slice with the contents of my right hand 
and  eat it, before anyone became wise to my actions. With 
precision raids of the fridge, conducted many times a day, I 
became quite serious about efficiency.  
   
   So I conducted 'bread tests'.  
     
   The bread box usually held a loaf of Wonder Bread, a loaf 
of Italian cream bread and some stale coffee cake for 
Grandpa's breakfast.  I would never touch his coffee cake. I 
wanted the white carbs. The pure stuff,  the kind you can feel 
turn to sugar on your tongue and gums.  
   I would take out one slice of Wonder Bread and one slice of 
Italian cream bread. I would feel them in my hands;  both had 
soft fluffy dough, giving to the touch.  
   For malleability and sculpting, Wonder Bread had the clear 
advantage.  I could take Wonder Bread and crumple it in my 
chubby little palm.   With the folds of my greasy palm I could, 
with one hard squeeze, make a small Wonder Bread statue of 
the Virgin Mary.  The head of the Madonna pushed up 
through my forefinger and thumb, while her body clothed in 
flowing white vestments was created in my tightened fist.  Of 
course,  while I did this, I would say a little prayer before 
dunking her in jelly.   
   This sort of devotional sculpture could not be done with 
the Italian cream bread. However, it  had other useful 
attributes.  While the crust of Wonder Bread is almost the same 
consistency as the bread itself, the crust of Italian cream bread 
is very different from its bread.  When the cream bread was 
sliced, the crust formed a shell that protected the soft bread 
inside.  The crust gave it form, like canvas stretchers supporting 
a painting. Italian cream bread could support mini masterpieces 
of snacking, created with fingerfuls of food from a refrigerated 
pallet
       
        








5 THE VIRGIN MARY


I loved the Virgin Mary.  A three foot statue of the Virgin Mary 
stood ion the far right side of the shed. This was the 
devotional place in our yard, which was in a very devout 
neighborhood.  Every back yard,  in this Italian 
neighborhood,  had a statue of the Virgin Mary.   
   The basic form was pretty much the same, a young woman 
dressed in flowing robes standing on a short pedestal cast in 
inexpensive cement.  However, backyard, Virgin Marys were 
very different in the details.    
   Some backyard, Virgin Marys had painted layers of 
vestments.  The outer layers were usually blue and inner layers a 
deep orange. Others had blue outer vestments with a golden 
sash and crown.   A few were more detailed with painted hair 
and face. 
   Then there were the few truly devout neighbors who would 
electrify the Virgin and outfit her with spotlights and even a 
neon halo. 
   These flashy differences are easy to see.  To the initiated,  to 
the ones who pray daily, to those who carry a rosary, other 
more subtle differences were apparent.  
   Back-yard Virgin Mary's have three basic differences, head 
position, arm position, and snake or no snake.    
   Mary's head is either a tilted down to the right or to the left.  
   Her arms are either, folded in a prayer position on her 
chest, or, extended out in a welcoming pose, as if to give a big, 
low hug to the whole world.  
   The third difference is, whether or not, Mary is standing on 
a snake.  
   Usually, a backyard Virgin Mary, that had folded arms, had 
no snake. Nor, could you see her bare feet. Her folded arms 
made this Mary seem a little up-tight. Grandpa used to say they 
reminded him of protestants.  
   A Virgin Mary with extended arms, standing on a snake, 
had her little feet out, for all the world to see. The snakes 
mouth was usually open, sculpted as if it was his last dying 
breath. Yet Mary stands elegantly, as if she standing on a beach 
or freshly mowed grass.  She is not portrayed digging her heel 
in for the rib crunching coup de gras.   
   
   The virgin in our back yard was the cheapest one on the 
block.  She was an extended armed, Mary standing on a 
snake.  However she had several large disfiguring gashes on 
her backside and one foot was nearly missing.  What's more, if 
you didn't know any better you might easily have mistaken the 
snake for a long lump of dog poop.  
   But her face was pretty and tilted slightly toward her left. We 
did not paint it.  We left it cement gray.  But we did extend her 
pedestal, by placing her on two discarded red bricks raising her 
a couple of inches higher than the neighbors Mary, whose 
vestments were painted blue and whose head was crowned.  
   
   My sister and I loved the Virgin Mary. We would say 
rosaries with our grandmother, sitting in the living room. We 
had glow in the dark rosaries, so we could finish one decat, ten 
hail Marys, as we went to sleep. We had prayer cards with rich 
colorful pictures of Mary and baby Jesus. We had small statues 
that we would use as toys, alongside Star Wars action figures or 
Barbie.  
   Mary was part of the family.  And when we prayed we only 
prayed to Mary.  We never prayed to Jesus.  We never really 
thought about him. I think it was because he was such an 
exhibitionist.  Our church was one of the churches that had a 
very realistic Jesus on the cross.  A skinny guy in a loin cloth 
leaves little to the imagination, beaten and bloody like some 
New York street twink, with a heroin habit. We could, just, not 
relate to Jesus' whole deal.   
   We could, however, relate to Mary. She's behind the 
scenes.  She has the ear of the big guy, God the father. Not like 
her ADHD son who can't open his mouth, without offending 
someone and causing all sorts of drama.  
   My favorite prayer was the Memoriae:
   
   Remember, O most gracious Virgin Mary, that never was it known 
that anyone who fled to thy protection, implored thy help, or sought thine 
intercession was left unaided.. . .
   
   Mary was the person to go to in a tight spot.  She won't let 
you down.  The prayer plays up Mary's accessibility and 
readiness to help. This suggests praying to others in the 
pantheon may not be as fruitful. The safe money is on Mary. 
   
   Inspired by this confidence,
   
   Yes, confidence, that's one thing you sure can't get from 
bipolar, narcissistic Christ.
   
   I fly unto thee, O Virgin of virgins, my mother…
   
   The flying was always my favorite part. And when forced to 
memorize and recite it in Catholic grade school, it was the line 
that almost no one forgot.  (Fruit of the womb was another 
favorite line from another Mary prayer. That would always get a 
giggle.) 
   
   …to thee do I come, before thee I stand, sinful and sorrowful.
   
   I loved the repetition of the actions.  I always thought of my 
self as sinful, all the stolen snacks and bad thoughts.
   
   O Mother of the Word Incarnate, despise not my petitions, but in thy 
mercy hear and answer me.
   
   I would often say this prayer quietly to myself, after 
Grandma had put us down to sleep. We would stay in 
Grandma's spare room on nights my mother was out. 
   
    Now get to sleep you Little Ragamuffins,  Grandma says 
as we hopped from one single bed to the other.  Grandpa was 
watching the 10 o'clock news with the volume turned so loud 
that we could easily listen through the french doors that 
separated the rooms.  
   
    Grandma we aren't tired.  
   
    I want to watch the news with grandpa,  I said. But really I 
was totally bored by the broadcast, and looked forward to the 
commercials and secretly hoping to watch the programming 
after the news.  This was usually a rerun of MASH, a comedy 
about doctors in the Korean war.   
   
    Let us! Please, please, we'll be good and go to bed right 
after,  we said squirming on the beds.
     Please, Grandma, just 10 minutes.  Maybe we could stay 
awake until Mom gets home. 
   
    Get you butts under the covers, or I will get the spatula.  
   
   This was Grandma's ultimate threat.  The spatula was a 
Rubbermaid cooking tool about 10 inches long with a hard 
plastic handle and a thin rubbery blade.  It would sting quite a 
bit, when Grandma would smack it against our rear-ends. 
   
    Let's say our prayers, now, and you can have some cookies 
for breakfast.  Grandma was a natural strategist and knew that 
for a cookie, I would exert pressure on my sister.
   
   We would say that popular prayer that I am sure contributes 
to my chronic dread, paranoia and panic attacks.  'Now, I lay 
me down to sleep I pray the lord my soul to keep If I die 
before I wake I pray the lord my soul to take.'  There is nothing 
like children quietly secure in their beds with the self 
consciousness of their possible death.    
   Grandma left the room.  I could see blue light from 
Grandpa's television through the french doors.  I could still 
hear the broadcast and would fade in an out while trying to 
follow words I barely understood, Cambodia, bombings and 
vietnamization. I would gain some consciousness during 
commercials for Tide or Lava.  But then slip closer to sleep 
with the sports news.  I could barely make out some small talk 
between my grandparents.  I was waiting, like most nights, so I 
might possibly hear my mother's car pull up outside the house. 
I hoped I might hear her keys jingle, and follow her footsteps 
up to the house. But not this night. I said one more prayer to 
the Virgin Mary, a Memoriae, requesting that she protect my 
mom, and somehow help my dad find his way home 
   
    








6 ST. AMBROSE


My Catholic grade school was two blocks from Edwards on a 
street named for the famous Italian inventor, Marconi.
   St. Ambrose was a large stone church, with large wooden 
doors and an ornate, circular stained glass window.  It was by 
far the most awe inspiring building in the neighborhood.
   Attached to the church, there was a less ornate sacristy, 
where the priests and nuns lived. Behind the Church sat a 
building that housed the Catholic grade school.
   The classes were, for the most part, taught by Carmelite 
nuns.  They wore long, black habits and kept their hair 
covered.   
   There were a few lay teachers who were neighborhood 
house wives looking for a little extra income.   
   The classes were small and grades one through eight shared 
the small playground during recess.  My class was very small 
with only eight boys and twelve girls.  
   I was by far the fattest boy in my class. My dark blue 
school-uniform pants, in husky size, seemed to be made from 
different material than the thinner boys.  As if they had 
shortened the legs of a workman's pants and put them on 
me.   My pockets and zipper seemed abnormally long and 
pockets were vastly spacious.  The other boys pants fit slim on 
their tiny frames and their light blue button up shirts tucked in 
under black belts, completing the ensemble with clean cut 
style.  My shirts were either too loose or too tight and kept 
scooting out of the pants, which I held up with a brown belt 
that had self-made extension holes, ice-picked into the leather, 
to accommodate my expanding girth.
   My sister and I would walk to school. On the way we would 
meet up with tributaries of other grade school students, joining 
into a stream of uniformed children that would be entering the 
large glass doors of the school building.   
   We would break off into our classrooms, walking down the 
long corridors of the first and second floors.  The home room 
teachers would stand at the classroom doors and like 
shepherds guiding us into our proper places.  
   The nuns all wore long black habits.   What distinguished 
one from another was one's expression.  
   There were kind ones like Sister Fullamina. Her face and 
hands were as white as a porcelain doll, and naturally red 
pigment on her lips. Occasionally, when she was adjusting her 
habit, the children could catch a glimpse of her greasy brown 
hair, with gray strands sprinkled throughout the locks.  She 
would gently guide the first graders into their homeroom. Sister 
Fullamina's kind disposition made the transition into grade 
school life easy.  As a second grader I envied those lucky 
children, like my sister, who were still in her homeroom, being 
gently guided into class with loving welcoming gestures.  
   Second grade homeroom was taught by Sister Fullashitta 
her face showed the wear and tear of years.  Her lips twitched 
with disappointment as each of her homeroom children 
entered. Her arms were not open  and welcoming like a Virgin 
Mary or Sister Fullamina. Rather, her arms were more often 
than not crossed, or when very impatient snapping a long ruler 
in the palm of her hand or, using the ruler as a crook to 
forcefully guide her errant flock.  She often singled me out.  But 
it wasn't because I was the fat kid with a husbandless Mother, 
who died her hair; it wasn't that I stood for everything that was 
wrong with this earthly world; it wasn't  because I was a 
gluttonous pig stealing chubby fistfuls of food from the fridge; 
it wasn't even that my father was Jewish and I had a Jewish 
name.
   She singled me out as support.  I was of average height but 
thick, not just fat.  I was fat, no doubt about it, but there was 
some structure there too. A massive frame holding up my girth 
and topped off with thick brown hair cut into a perfect bowl 
on my head. (The hairstyle was often referred to as helmet 
head. I used to imagine that this was not only for its 
appearance but for the fluffy protection that it lent me.) 
   So Sister Fullashitta singled me out as her crutch when she 
really wanted to lay into one of the children.   
   For example there was Matt Norseman who was s skinny 
kid with a narrow face, a big smile and a sharp wit which he 
would not spare against the nuns.  When he would poke fun at 
one of them Sister Fullashitta would pull me out of line or get 
me up from my desk and walk me over to Matt's desk.  Then 
with the ruler in her right hand she would repeatedly snap it 
against Matt's knuckles, while, she stabilized her aging body on 
my fat frame with her left hand, her larger than normal nun 
hand mussing up my perfect helmet head. 
   I would often catch Matt looking at me helplessly, judging 
me for aiding in his corporal punishment.  I would close my 
eyes or look away.  This was not my fight. I was merely doing 
what I was put on earth to do.  Support the Lord's work like 
some unwilling apostle who would later rise to importance. 
   And you would think that in my role as nun crutch I my be 
given some special favors. But Sister Fullashitta would unleash 
her full critical power against me despite my aid.  She always 
seemed to have a problem with my gait.  I was fat, my blue 
husky uniform pants would rub together.  If I was walking 
alone through the cinder block hallways of the grade school 
you could easily hear my pants swishing together.  Sister 
Fullashitta hated this. But she was really critical of the way I 
walked down stairs. 
   
    Gregory why do you always lead with your right leg when 
you walk down the stairs.  You look like and empty headed ape 
smuggling bananas.  
   
    Sorry, Sister Fullashitta  
   
    Try it again.   She clears the rest of my classmates from the 
stairwell. So I can have a clear piste for my downhill run.  I 
could see that Matt Norseman was already making some stupid 
remarks about Sister Fullashitta's comments.  And why did she 
have to say empty headed ape.   I knew I would have to endure 
several days of teasing for that one.
   
    Try it again.  Your just like some lazy Roman soldier, the 
kind that killed Christ. 
   
   So I walked, fighting all of my instincts to shuffle down the 
stairs as I always would.  In order to walk one foot in front of 
the other, requires one to twist his hips from side to side 
which, to me, felt almost sexy or flirty.  And to make this 
movement while wading through the gaggle of my little girl 
classmates put me off.   It was much easier to shuffle,  it's fun 
and care free.  Perhaps, shuffling is  not graceful, but you won't 
catch your big thighs together and fall flat on your big fat butt. 
   
   So of the two Nuns you first meet at St. Ambrose school 
Sister Fullamina and Sister Fullashitta, Sister Fullashitta was 
hands down the worst.   We would often talk about them on 
the playground.  The playground was sweet relief from the 
confines of the classroom and the dangers of social etiquette 
and advanced bipedalism.   
   The playground was an asphalt square with four-square 
boxes painted in yellow.  The twang of red rubber balls and 
screaming children's voices were everywhere.  We were young 
prisoners ragging on the guards.
   
    Isn't it funny that Sister Fullamina is named Fullamina,   I 
said.
   
    What is that ape boy, Does Sister Fullamina have a banana 
for you? 
   
    Cut it out Matt,   I said and gave him a punch on the arm 
(Reminding him I have the clear weight advantage.)  
    You know Sister Fullamina is really nice,  but her name is 
'full of mean a'. 
   
    Yeah I guess that's kind of weird,  Matt said almost 
keeping his eye on the girls four-square game.
   
    I wish there was something we could call Sister Fullashitta,  
I questioned aloud.
   
    Her breath stinks like poop. And my knuckles still hurt 
from last week,  Matt replied.  What's worse when I got home 
my mother saw the marks on my hand and then she gave me 
another wallop for acting up at school.  So I get hit again just 
'cause my knuckles are bruised. 
   
    You should wear gloves,  I suggested.
   
    Well, helmet head, you should just roll over for once,  Matt 
said angrily,  you just stand there like a dog's dork while she 
hits us. 
   
   Later at home I told Grandpa about the nun making me 
walk down the stairs.   He wasn't a church goer like Grandma 
and I could usually get sympathy from him if it was an 
ecclesiastical offense.  I told him that I thought it was funny 
that Sister Fullamina was in fact nice and Sister Fullashitta was 
the mean one. 
   
    So Grandpa, I wish I could call her, some kind of mean 
name. 
   
    Who are you talking about,  Grandpa said sarcastically, 
 Sister Full a shit duh.  He paused and  patted me on my 
helmet head.   Son, I look forward to when you are a little bit 
smarter so you can see how stupid you really are. 
    
   The Scapula
   
   Sister Fullashitta would start the day with homeroom. This 
was the time when all the administrative details were taken care 
of. We had role calls to smoke-out the absentees and the 
tardies.  There were other issues, such as signed homework 
and notes.  After that there was always the issue of extra 
clothes for  accidents  and other miscellaneous business.
   
   One girl, Marybeth, had an accident almost weekly, that 
required an emergency change of clothes.  We would be 
standing, saying the pledge of allegiance, or sitting drilling the 
times tables and the class would erupt in laughter at the sound 
of runny water interlaced with desperate sobbing.   
   Now, second grade you think you have it all together,  but 
these things happen to the best of us. I still always wonder why 
Marybeth never just ran out of the room before it started or 
why after so many times she still cried.  There were even a few 
times late in the year that the event was so predictable and 
expected that no one in whole class laughed when she started 
to tinkle during the recitation of the Our Father.   She just 
simply walked to the back of the class picked up her bag 
containing her emergency uniform and left the homeroom for 
the nurses office, while the rest of the class sat down and 
opened their grammar books.
   
   One thing we never laughed at was puke.  A kid puking was 
an awful, frightening affair.  If one student ralphs in class and 
least two others will retch and possibly blow chunks as 
well.  There is no humor about it. It is  a serious matter 
involving a trip to the nurse's office not for a quick change but 
a glass of 7-up and phone call to parents. It most likely means 
a trip home.  
   Kid puke is like an oil spill. It is treated as an accident 
involving hazardous waste. With pee, the janitor simply mops 
up. But with puke he cordons off the area and lays sawdust 
over the spill. The treated sawdust barely covering the odor of 
fruit loop breakfast, fear, and bile. 
   
   So after homeroom, if there were no accidents, Sister would 
usually start with some English.    Then every hour we would 
switch books, ending a lesson on one subject and starting 
another.  The day was pure monotony.   Everyday, lunch and 
recess spared us from these tedious classes for an hour. Twice 
a week we would have art or music that let us do something 
other than quiet study.  I rarely followed the classes I would sit 
there and daydream.  Serving my time in solitary contemplation 
or staring out the window at the trees. 
   
   Occasionally we would have a guest speaker. It was usually a 
priest or deacon to tell us some facts about the Catholic faith.
   
    Children, children, please, pay attention, we have a guest 
today.  He is a new a visiting priest Father Geoff 
Brannigan.  He is a visiting priest from Ireland and he is staying 
at St. Patrick's in Dog Town.  Have any of you gone to mass 
there? 
   A few children raise there hands.  Sally proudly says her 
cousins go to school there so she often goes to mass at St. 
Patrick's.   
   I had never set foot inside another church. My 
grandmother always feared going to the wrong denomination 
so we never went into other parishes. My Grandma often 
spoke of the horror of one time, in her youth,  sitting  halfway 
through a Protestant service.
   
    Father Geoff is going to talk to you about redemption, 
heaven and Mother Mary.  Sister Fullashitta stated.
   
    So can any of you tell me on what day, your man, Jesus 
was born?  Father Geoff asked.
   
   The class was unusually quiet.   
   Guests tended to scare the smarter kids like Marybeth and 
Matt, I guess they were busy thinking.   Sally who spoke up 
about her cousins in Dog Town was certainly one of the 
dumbest students in the class but totally unafraid of speaking 
to anyone.   
   I was sensing that  this could be my chance to shine. So I 
begin to calculate. Well, I know that Jesus was born a long time 
ago.  And today is Tuesday. So I begin counting back one 
thousand nine hundred and seventy-six years.  I was getting 
lost in calculation and Marco the second stupidest kid in class 
was raising his hand.  So I blurted out:
    Saturday, Father, Jesus was born on a Saturday. And Mary 
took him to mass the next day. 
   
   Marco, noticeably upset at my circumvention of standard 
procedure of waiting to be called upon, blurted out his guess, 
 Sunday, Father, it was Sunday. And Mary was at Church. 
   
    No, children that's not quite right,  Father Geoff said a 
little shaken by our answers.
   
   Now the rest of the dullard students in class offer up their 
hypothesis,  Wednesday. . .
    Monday. . ..  
   
   The smart kids stayed completely out of this theological 
train wreck.
   
    No, Dear children, you have gone off the mark,  Father 
Geoff said sympathetically. 
    The answer is Christmas, Jesus was born on Christmas.  
   
   Father Geoff now leaned back on Sister Fullashitta's desk 
almost exasperated.  Sister Fullashitta sat behind him looking 
terribly disappointed at her class.  
   Father Geoff was dressed in standard priest black, with a 
black suit coat over his black shirt.  He had a full head of greasy 
white hair and pale wrinkly skin. His black suit coat was ill 
fitting and his large white hands waved about as he talked.
   
    I am here to talk to you about Mother Mary.  And a gift 
that she gave to all of us.  A gift that can make sure we get into 
heaven.  And this gift will make sure you don't have to spend 
too much time in purgatory, or fall all the way down to the fires 
below.  
   
    You mean h. e. double tooth picks,  stupid Sally said.
   
    Yes, dear child.    
   Father Geoff continued,  There was this Priest a long time 
ago named Simon, Simon Stock.  He lived way back in twelve 
hundred and fifty-one.  And the Mother Mary appeared to 
him. In her hand she was holding two pieces of brown cloth 
with two long strings connecting them.   She told Simon to 
take these pieces of cloth and string and wear it around his 
neck.  With one piece of cloth over his front and the other 
piece over his back.  She told him that he who wears this cloth 
will surly escape the fires of Hell.  
   
   We students were transfixed by the story and shocked at 
father Geoff uttering loudly the word Hell.
   
    Now you children know that as you are dying, even if you 
have committed the worst sin, even if you have murdered, you 
can ask God to forgive you. And he will surely forgive you. But 
for your sins you may have to do some time in purgatory.  
   
    So all I have to do is say  I'm sorry before I die and I get 
into heaven?  stupid Sally asked. 
   
    Yes, the Almighty is forgiving of our sins. 
   
    So we just have to say we are sorry?  dull Marko asked. 
   
    How about a murder?  another student asked.
   
    Why yes, that is up to God. 
   
    What if you stole a million dollars and you killed 
someone,  another young theologian asked.
   
    Yes, the Lord is forgiving.  But if you have committed so 
many sins that your soul  has turned black you may have to 
spend some time in purgatory as punishment for your 
sins.  But God will not send any soul to Hell that is truly 
repentant.  Do you know about purgatory children? 
   
    That's the place unpasteurized babies go to,  Sally said.
   
    I think you mean unbaptized, sweet child.  But no, 
unbaptized babies go to limbo. 
   
    Yes, father, I know  Mickey d'Angelino said.  My grandma 
tells me to say some prayers for my father who was in a poker 
game that went wrong. Grandma says he lived like a bad man 
but he was a good boy at heart.  She tells me to say some extra 
prayers so god will let him out of purgatory early. 
   
    Why, yes, that's right,  Father Geoff  said, stunned that a 
single theological question was answered correctly. Sister 
Fullashitta was showing something close to pride for her 
students.
   
    That’s right children, God may see fit to let you wait before 
you get into heaven.  After you die he will make you work off 
your sins. But you have to be truly sorry. 
   
    Does it hurt there, like the other place. You know. The H 
word?  Maggie asks.  
   
    Now children you can say Hell as long as you are not 
cussing.  But ... 
   
   Suddenly Mickey interrupted,  Shut up, stupid Maggie, of 
course it doesn't hurt in purgatory. Mickey was noticeably 
bothered by the idea that his father could be suffering in 
purgatory.
     You're such a pig face Maggie. 
   
    Now children please be calm,  Father Geoff tried to quiet 
the small row that has developed in the class.
   
    Mickey,  Maggie replied,  I don't know why you're so 
upset, your Dad is in the penitentiary not purgatory.  My mom 
told me so.  My mom says you are all a bunch of low life 
crooks. And he ain't never getting out. 
   
    Shut up pig face.  
   
   Mickey lunged across the desk and just managed to grab 
little Maggie's pigtails.
   
   Sister Fullashitta erupted,  rushed past Father Geoff, who 
was noticeably flustered by the ruckus, he was obviously 
unaccustomed to dealing with young children in close 
quarters.  The priests' position, high on the alter and in the 
sacristy, keeps them isolated from the young, rebellious flock. 
   
   Whipping past my desk and grabbing me by the collar, 
Sister Fullashitta drags me to Mickey's desk and delivers him 5 
sharp smacks with the ruler as she again balances her weight 
on my head,  and sends him out of the room.  
    Mickey d'Angelino,  Sister Fullashitta yelled,  you're sure to 
follow that Father of yours. Out into the hall.  
    Sorry, Father, Please continue. 
   
   Father Geoff regained his composure and returned to the 
major themes.
   
    Forgiveness dear children, forgiveness is what the Lord 
gives us.  If we are truly repentant. That means you must say 
you are sorry and you must work off, by prayer, all the sins you 
have committed.  
   The class began to calm and follow Father Geoff 
again.  Mickey was peeking through the small window of the 
classroom door. 
   
    Think of this example children.  Imagine you have just 
thought bad thoughts about your parents,  then, you walked 
down to the corner market and stole a piece of candy. Next, as 
you are tired from abusing yourself all night long, you walk 
straight in front of a bus and it hits you. In a blink of an eye 
you are dead.  God has taken you. Were you ready? Were you 
free of sin? 
   
    err Father,  Sister Fullashitta interjected loudly,  these 
students are a bit young for self abuse. 
   
    Oh, yes, sorry Sister. 
    You get the point, children, you do bad things and 
suddenly you are dead. You don't have time to ask god for 
forgiveness. And your soul heavy with black sin falls deep 
down into everlasting fire. 
   
   The children who were listening were upset, some sobbing 
other shouting.   
   
    Quiet children, please calm yourselves.  This is what I am 
here to talk to you about. This is why Mary's gift to Simon is so 
important. 
   
   Father held the brown scapula in his hands and showed the 
class.  He held the scapula with such reverence and awe as if 
the pieces of felt and string held tangible power. We children 
were transfixed by this celestial loop hole, this holy insurance 
policy on a string.
   
    Now look closely children, it says on one face of the 
scapular, that whomever wears this shall never suffer  eternal 
fire.
    So even if your soul is weighed down by un-confessed 
sins, you will not go to hell. What's more every day you wear 
this, takes some time off purgatory. 
   
   Father Geoff then turned around to his briefcase on Sister 
Fullashitta's desk. As he does the class erupts into chatter about 
sins and death by accident. Whether it is possible to ask God 
for forgiveness before you die.  I was watching Father Geoff 
closely, and not joining in a conversation with the boys about 
whether it is possible to ask for forgiveness before a lawn 
mower cuts off your head.  
   
    But what if it gets your lips and mouth first?  Ben said. 
 Then you can't say your sorry, before you're killed.   
   
    You don’t need to say it out of your mouth, you just need 
to say it inside your head,  Matt corrected him.
   
   Father Geoff took out a plastic bag full of scapulars handed 
them to Sister Fullashitta.  They were passed along to each of 
us. 
   I put it on, right there in class. I was instantly warmed by the 
power.  I felt easy as if a great burden had be lifted off of 
me.  To be honest, before that day I had never worried about 
the worst case scenario of death for a Catholic.  That is death 
without repentance.  But the notion of eternity in hell or even a 
thousand years in purgatory caused by the simple omission of 
an 'I'm sorry', was a powerful thought, easily obsessed over.   
   From that day forward I obsessed.  Even wearing the 
Scapula while crossing the street I would repeat, I'm sorry I'm 
sorry I'm sorry,  just in case a car when hitting me would rip 
the scapular off my neck.  One cannot be too careful. Constant 
repentance was logically, the safe bet.
    








7 FAMILY HISTORY


Kreisman is an odd name for a Catholic boy in an Italian 
neighborhood.  It is an odd name for a Catholic. The name is 
Jewish.  Although, it sounds German, old folks and Europeans 
can readily identify its Jewishness by the single 'n' in 'man'.  
   As my father was absent, my father's parents Lou and Ester 
were my only connection to my Jewish heritage growing up.   
   Grandpa Lou, my father's father, was a short, tubby man 
with a long bulbous nose and thick white hair.  His ears 
seemed enormous to me.  He had short, fat fingers that he 
would use to grab food from other peoples plates. His thick 
hands seemed to always be greasy.  He was loud and 
transparently self-centered.  This was evident even to 
children.   His favorite joke consisted of questioning how 
others feel and when they answer he responds by telling them 
how he feels: You're hungry, how can you be hungry? I just ate. 
You're cold, how can you be cold? I have this wonderful coat.  
   Grandma Ester, my father's mother, was exactly 
opposite.  She was thin, quiet and shook like a small animal. 
She had a large hooked nose.  Thin, curly, black hair framed 
her thin face.
   They had moved to the suburbs of St. Louis from the 
Jewish neighborhood in the city, as the neighbors started to buy 
houses there in the sixties.  
   Grandpa Lou complained that liberal Jews are to blame for 
selling their houses for a social ideal with no thought of 
property value.  
   On the occasions all four of my grandparents were 
together, religious differences were easily bridged through 
racism.
   
    Bud,  Grandpa Lou said,  these Italians really know how 
to take care of the neighborhood. 
   
    The mafia, that's what does it,  Grandpa Bud replied,  and 
the church.  They make sure that no houses in this 
neighborhood are sold to the wrong people. 
   
    I hear you don't even have black mail men,  Grandpa Lou 
questioned.
   
    Well, only very rarely,  Grandpa Bud replied.  We don't 
seem to have them twice.  They see to that down at city hall. 
   
   Talking about black people in St. Louis always stirred-up 
Grandma Mary.  She seemed to be such a sweet old lady. And 
for the most part she was sweet, although from time to time, 
she was embarrassingly racist.   They're taking all of our jobs,  
she would gripe, implying that black people were taking the 
unskilled city jobs away from the Italian immigrants. 
   Grandma Ester would, for her part, try and gripe along, but 
her racism lacked a certain enthusiasm. And as an educated Jew 
she rarely competed for those type of jobs. 
   
   These racist sessions would often end with talk about 
munitions.  
   In the late sixties many families living in the city started 
buying guns.  The guns were for protection.  The white city 
dwellers imagined impending race riots.  The civil unrest and 
upheaval of the sixties were interpreted by these middle-aged 
immigrants as nearing apocalypse of their way of life.  Lives 
that they had just carved out for themselves. So they looked to 
the only protection they could trust, guns and ammo.   
   In our little house, we had two shotguns, a hand gun, and 
cache of bullets. They were kept in the basement with my 
grandpa's tools. They were never taken out.  The guns were like 
the scapular I was wearing. The guns were last resort comfort 
from obsessive thoughts that your neighbors might one day 
come to kill you.   
   
   Grandpa Lou loved to talk about money and held himself 
as if he were wealthy.  He always had a new Cadillac. He never 
bought. He leased, and traded up every year.  He said cars kill 
you on resell.  You're screwed once you drive it off the lot. 
   Although he lived in the suburbs, he worked in the city, at a 
furniture and dry goods store called Fair Mercantile. It was a 
large building built at the turn of the twentieth century.  It was 
made of the same red brick as the Edwards house. It was 
located just off the railroad tracks. It had a large warehouse and 
huge platform elevators that Grandpa Lou would take me on 
when I visited him.  
   My Grandma Mary often complained that Fair Mercantile 
was anything but fair as the prices were too high.  Grandpa 
Lou's wholesale prices were still more than Sears or other 
newer department stores.   
   Even back in my childhood Fair Mercantile was a dinosaur, 
and Grandpa Lou was too.  His sales skills had been honed 
for a different world. A more elegant world, were people wore 
hats, and women wore skirts and heels, where people would 
get dress up to go out dancing.  Back in the day, even the poor 
immigrants and the neighbors had their standards of right 
behavior.  Grandpa saw the lifestyle and the lax morals of the 
seventies as a deal breaker for most sales.
   
    Look at these bums!  Grandpa Lou would say,  driving 
these beat up muscle cars, wearing dungarees to work, and t-
shirts with pictures on them with no over-shirt or sports 
coat.  It looks like they are in their damn, pajamas.  How can 
you sell elegant furniture to bums.  Dead beats like these 
probably sit on the floor.   
   
   Grandma Ester would chime in,  yesterday, honest to god, 
I saw a thirty year old woman with no bra and no jacket in 
shorts, walking down the street with her kids. I had to turn my 
head. 
   
   There was larger reason that this modern day lack of morals 
was so present to mind with my grandparents. Their children 
were getting a divorce.    
   
   The marriage had started out as some sort of an 
abomination for the two grandmothers.  Grandma Mary, my 
mother's mother, was devout Catholic and Grandma Ester was 
a devout Jew.  Each saw the marriage as a threat to their way of 
life.  
   My grandfathers could not have cared less about 
that.  Grandpa Bud, my mother's father, was not at all opposed 
to the marriage as it seemed my mother was marrying up; a 
Jewish doctor as a son in law is something to brag about.  A 
doctor is a very practical job too.  Doctors work with their 
hands and go to work every day.  Doctors have more in 
common with plumbers and mechanics than they do with 
white-collar rich folks.
   Grandpa Lou, my father's father, was not marrying up in a 
financial way, but my mother was a beautiful young 
woman.  And Grandpa Lou certainly saw that his son was 
doing much better than anyone had expected, as he was the 
skinny runt of the Kreisman family.    
   Grandpa Lou was short, but he was stocky, and had 
powerful arms for a Jewish man of his time. He almost never 
took exercise, only lifting the occasional ottoman on the job.  
   Grandpa Lou's eldest son Stewart was the golden boy of 
the Kreisman clan.  He was 6 feet 2, with full wavy hair, broad 
shoulders and a strong chin. His nose was big, but it was 
straight, aquiline. He was such a good looking Jew my mother 
would comment that he could be mistaken for an Italian. 
Stewart boxed too. He did quite well in the amateur leagues in 
St. Louis but got out early to start his own successful 
business.  A picture of Stewart shirtless in his boxing shorts 
and gloves was proudly displayed in my grandparent's living 
room. 
   Kent, my father, was barely 6 feet even when standing 
perfectly straight, which he seldom did. His rounded shoulders 
gave him a gestural shape of a wilting lower case 't'.  He had a 
big hooked nose.  He was barely athletic, occasionally running 
around the track, a skinny figure in shorts. My mother would 
tell him,  don't worry, I didn't marry you for you looks. 
   To fully trace the positive and negative qualities I inherited 
from my mother's and father's sides, I need to elaborate a bit 
more fully.  Was I a chubby little boy in ill-fitting clothes 
snacking my way to obesity, as a result of genetics? Where did 
the obsessive thoughts come from?  Does 'crazy' run in my 
family?  
   My mother's family has a history of insanity.  Although, a 
complete story of the insanity, on my mother's side is obscured 
by the fact that, when they arrived in America, they had broken 
off relations with the rest of the family in Italy.   
   This leaves my great grandmother as the earliest record of 
mental instability in my family.  Great Grandma Maria was by 
personal accounts a very scary woman.  She arrived in America 
in her thirties, already the mother of five children, of which my 
grandmother Mary was the youngest.  Great Grandma Maria, 
always wore traditional black dress and kept her head covered 
with a scarf.  Her wardrobe was something very close to a 
nun's habit. 
   
   When the family arrived in St. Louis from Italy, they lived in 
tenement housing near the river. That part of St. Louis was 
completely torn down in the sixties during the last great stage 
of urban revitalization.  The famous Gateway Arch and park 
now occupy this place.  At the time, it was a very crowded and 
dirty part of the city.  Rail and river traffic had not yet been 
replaced by interstate trucking. It was a vital place, where 
immigrants who were willing to do any sort of labor could 
easily find some work.  
   My great grandfather did pretty well for himself on two 
fronts.  He had aligned himself with the local Italian strongmen 
and became something of an immigrant organizer.  If you were 
looking for work you could come to him.  He knew the people 
on the job sites.  He would provide the candidates, and get a 
small commission for each position.  You would also go to my 
great grandfather, if you wanted a place to live.  He would put 
you up in a tenement and collect the rent, taking a small piece 
for himself and giving the rest to the landlord.   
   In five years he had accumulated enough money to 
purchase a small tenement and several horse drawn 
carriages.  He expanded into the ice business.  He would use 
the carriages to deliver ice, to his clients which he had already 
put into tenements and jobs. This way he took a few more 
dollars from everyone he dealt with. 
   He was a savvy businessman by all accounts. He knew the 
right people in the neighborhood.  Was he in the Mafia? Well, 
certainly it was not like the movies. The mafia at that time was 
an engine of commerce.  They were the banks for people who 
could not go to banks to get a loan. They would connect the 
savers, who had some cash, with the immigrants, who needed 
to borrow to set up their family in the new world.  The Mafia 
made transactions possible. 
   Did the Mafia also deal in prostitution and other things 
beyond the law?  Without a doubt. But it was a different time, a 
lawlessness without pretension of rule of law. They were giving 
people what they wanted.  
   The financial system of today is much the same in 
function.  Loans are given to people who cannot afford them 
to buy things totally overvalued.  But now there is the pretense 
of rule of law. Just phony ideals and swiss cheesed regulations 
that inauthentically assure people and superficially distinguish 
today's lenders from the loan sharks of the past.
   
   So obviously, on my mother's side there is some business 
acumen and intelligence. This more recently had manifested 
itself in my mother's brother, Uncle Bill, who started his own 
successful family business. He has two lovely children who are 
married and given him grandchildren.  You can trace the line of 
sanity and good decision making from my great 
grandfather.  However, this did seem to bypass my mother.  
   
   Great Grandmother was a different story.  While Great 
Grandfather was busy making a life and money for the family, 
Great Grandmother had lost it.  She was institutionalized when 
my grandmother was just five years old.  Some speculated it 
was because of the new environment.  A fast paced American 
city at the turn of the century was a totally different psychic 
landscape from a quiet Italian village.  There must have been 
issues with the language and the burden of children.  
   My mother loved to tell a joke, that she thought shed some 
light on my great grandmother's problems and issues with not 
being able to speak English. 
   
   Two Italian immigrants are having lunch.  Tony, an 
immigrant who speaks English pretty well, asks his workmate 
Luigi why he always eats baked beans for lunch.
    You could have a nice sandwich like this it's called tuna 
fish,  Tony says.  
    But all I know how to say, is 'baked beans.' 
   Luigi replies,  Well it's really simple, 'tuna fish 
sandwich.'  Say it after me, 'tuna fish sandwich.'  
   The next day Luigi goes into the restaurant, the waitress 
says,  What'll it be.   
   Luigi says carefully,  Tuna fish sandwich.  
    Sure honey,  the waitress replies,  do you want that on 
white or wheat toast.  
   Luigi startled by the follow up question says,  Baked 
beans.   
   
   So living overseas can be stressful. But it isn't sufficient 
condition for clinical insanity and seldom requires 
institutionalization. 
   Yet, Great Grandma was put away.  My grandma was still 
too young to live on her own and was put in an 
orphanage.  Her brothers and sisters were able to start work 
already.   The boys worked on the docks and did odd 
jobs.  And her sisters started to work at the Tumms pill 
factory.  They would put pills into bottles, and stick cotton in 
the narrow openings with their thin fingers.  Although my 
grandma's five year old fingers were certainly thin, she was just 
too young to go to work with the rest of her family. So she was 
sent away to an orphanage next to the Catholic cathedral, south 
of the tenement where her family lived.  
    
   My grandma Mary lived in the orphanage from the time she 
was five, until she could work and live on her own at age 
15.  The orphanage was strict. It was run by nuns.  They had 
the best intentions when doling out harsh punishments. The 
nuns were trying to instill in the young children, a strong moral 
fiber to resist the temptation to do something immoral to 
escape their crushing poverty and loneliness.   
   The nuns ran the orphanage like a work camp. The children 
did all the chores, but had four hours of study each day.  They 
taught the children to cook and clean and do the laundry.  But 
the most important thing they learned is how to patiently get 
through a day of drudgery, boredom, and pain without 
fidgeting or complaining.
   
   Meanwhile, Grandma's Mother Maria was locked away in a 
mental asylum, on the southwest side of St. Louis.  The asylum 
was called City Hospital.  It was a large gated campus in what, 
was then the remote suburbs of St. Louis.  Behind the gate was 
a complex of nineteenth century four story buildings. They 
were the largest and most ornate structures in that area.   There 
were rooms and wards for all kinds of mental illness, 
retardation, and physical handicaps. There was even a room for 
the horribly disfigured.  
   In these wards, they locked up all the people who could just 
not function at the unforgiving pace of normal life.  Others 
they locked away because the sight of them was just too much 
for normal people to take, such as the disfigured.  The burn 
victims and deformed, who were not distracted by depression, 
voices, or delusions, were more equipped to deal with the 
disappointments and difficulties of every day life. Every day life 
just could not handle them. For the most part these deformed 
inmates became the care takers for the others with retardation 
and mental illness.  
   City hospital was a very scary place. The thought of Great 
Grandmother Maria in black garb lurking in the long dark halls 
of ward, her face crushed by disappointment was a thought 
that plagued my grandmother.  Great Grandmother Maria was 
sedated most of the time. She lay on a small cot in a 
windowless room, that was cleaned by a horribly deformed 
woman that was otherwise perfectly normal.   
   
   Back at the orphanage Grandma Mary slept on the top 
bunk of a bunk bed in a large room that held 15 bunk 
beds.   The room reeked of thirty, dirty children.  Grandma 
lived day in and day out without affection.   No mother or 
family to hold or touch her.  Starved for loving affection, she 
soon adapted and became prickly to any touch.  The nuns 
discouraged touching, as it could very easily lead to sin.  
   At age 15 grandma got a job at the same pill factory her 
sisters worked at.  She had all the rambunctiousness worn out 
of her and she would gladly sit for hours on the tall factory 
stool stuffing cotton into the narrow tops of pill bottles.  When 
she was 16 she met Grandpa Bud. 
   
   Grandpa Bud was not Italian.  He was a mutt of poor early 
American immigrants.   His last name was Wacker, which was 
German.  He had come to the city of St. Louis from the 
surrounding undeveloped countryside to find work and new 
way of life.   
   He came from poverty he was orphaned when he was 5 
years old. He was not sent to an orphanage. He went to the 
circus to work for his aunt, a trapeze artist.    
   His parents had died in a house fire.  Well, really a shack 
fire.  Their ramshackle shack, in the outskirts of Missouri, was 
normally heated by wood, which they cut in the summer and 
dried for easy burning in the winter.  But one year my 
grandfather's parents had come into some money, after having 
a better than expected crop of peanuts, and tending to the 
animals of a rich farmer next door. With this extra money they 
had purchased some coal to heat the stove.  People were raving 
about coal heat.  They raved about how little you had to stoke 
it.  With wood you would have to constantly monitor and 
throw on another log.  But coal was so compact and burned so 
slowly and evenly that one shovel-full would last all night 
long.  The potbellied stove sat in the main room of their shack. 
My grandfather, his parents, and his brothers and sisters, 
would sleep around it in widening circles based on their rank in 
the family.  My grandfather the youngest was, therefore the 
farthest away from the fire.
   Grandpa had great sense of black humor about the fire. He 
had told us the story of the night he became an orphan, many 
times. 
    It had been a good year and it was late December. All the 
work had stopped as the ground is frozen too hard to work. 
There was snow on the ground.   My mom had pickled up a 
bunch of greens and other things to eat.  One week before the 
old mare, Bonnie, had died so we'd been eaten horse meat 
stew all week. 
   
    You ate Bonnie, a horse!  I cried,  Grandpa, how could 
you do it? 
   
    It wasn't easy,  Grandpa continued.  Bonnie was really 
nice. She would carry me back and forth to school.  I was really 
sad when she died, but when your hungry you got to eat.  And 
my mom was a great cook she made horse meat and pickled 
greens taste good.  Not like your Grandma Mary, here, she'll 
turn a T bone into shoe leather.  
   
    Still, horse meat, Grandpa? 
   
    Well, to tell the truth, the only one who seemed really upset 
by Bonnie dying was Ben Brown, the donkey. 
   
    Ben Brown? Grandpa, what kinda name is that? 
   
    Ben Brown was a stubborn old donkey.  He didn't seem to 
like any one in the world, except me and his horse friend 
Bonnie. 
    Bonnie and Ben Brown shared a stall at the side of our 
house. Ben Brown used to do work around the farm and 
would still pull the plow now and again but he almost never 
went into town except when there was a lot of provisions to 
buy.  And every time I left for school on Bonnie's back I would 
catch him giving a glance like he missed me. 
   
    Oh, Ben Brown sounds, cute!  I said.
   
    Well, they took old, Ben Brown into town that last time. 
They loaded him up with a cart to carry a bunch of coal back to 
the house.  The same coal that we used to cook up Bonnie the 
horse.  
    I remember sitting round the table eating a bowl full of 
horse stew in the warmth of a coal heated room.  You could 
hear the wind outside and I felt kind of sorry for Bonnie while 
chewing.  
   
    Oh, Grandpa, no! 
   
    I felt  kind of sorry for Ben Brown the donkey too. He 
had lost his friend Bonnie, the same Bonnie who the whole 
family was chewing on.  I remember  looking out the window 
seeing Ben Brown's  dark sad face and long ears twitching in 
the cold.  I felt even worse with the next bite of Bonnie the 
horse.  
    We were all sitting around the table my dad was spooning 
out another helping of horse all around. When we heard a 
couple loud knocks on the wall.  My mother thought there was 
someone at the door.  But the knocks came louder and from 
the other side of the house. 
   
    Who was it, Grandpa? 
   
    Why, Ben Brown of course. He had turned his rear-end to 
the window now and started kicking with his hind legs against 
the wall of the house.  He kicked so hard he knocked a whole 
clear through the wall and broke the window too. 
   
    What did he do next? 
   
    He just stuck his head in the window and one hoof 
through the whole in the wall. He started pawing in our 
direction like a dog begging for some attention. 
   
    Did he want some food Grandpa? Did he want a piece of 
Bonnie too. 
   
    Heck no! He wanted me. He was lonely.  So I went over 
and started petting him. After dinner we tried patching up the 
hole in the wall with a thick blanket, but it was powerfully cold 
and the wind was blowing at the blanket. When it did we could 
catch a glimpse of poor old Ben Brown kicking at the dirt like 
the saddest donkey in the whole world.
    But it was late and hole or no hole we had to get some 
sleep.  In winter all of us used to sleep around the stove. 
   
    You didn't have your own room, Grandpa? 
   
    We didn't have shit. And I mean that literally, we didn't 
have a toilet.  We had to go to the out-house. And in the winter 
we had to sleep where it was warm. So we are all sleeping 
around the stove.  That night the stove was powerfully hot as 
Mom was burning coal all day long while cooking Bonnie.  But 
that wind kept a blowing and just before he blew out the lamp 
my Dad put on another chunk of coal. 
   
    Were you warm then, Grandpa? 
   
    Yes. I remember  it was so hot I was almost sweating just 
before going to sleep.  And I was sleeping the farthest from 
the stove, 'cause I was the youngest.  The stove was red hot 
and we were all full of horse meat. We could not keep our eyes 
open, and we fell asleep. But next thing I see is a wall of yellow 
fire and all of sudden I was outside in the snow watching the 
house burn down.  
   
    What happened, Grandpa? 
   
    Well, I am not sure of all the details but that red hot stove 
must of  let loose an ember and hit my Dad's moonshine.  
That must have made the house burst into flame. 
   
    But how did you get outside? 
   
    Ben Brown had dragged me by the pajamas. He was 
standing next to me watching the house go up in flames, 
snorting and jumping like he had gone mad. 
   
    Ben Brown saved you Grandpa?  You were saved by a 
donkey? 
   
    From that day on it was just that donkey and me. 
   
    What happened to your parents? 
   
    Well, they died.  My Dad was dead, charred worse than 
Bonnie.  My mom went to the hospital, but died soon after she 
got there. 
   
    Oh Grandpa! 
   
    No, Greg.  It's OK. That was a long time ago. And Ben 
Brown and I went to live with my aunt in the circus. But that's a 
story for another time. 
   
   
   
   
   Grandpa and Grandma meet 
   
   My Grandparents met in the city of St. Louis, in the late 
nineteen twenties.  They were both orphans of a sort. My 
grandpa was a true orphan. Grandma just lived like one.  
   We are not quite sure when it happened, but my Great 
Grandfathers' businesses went bust during the volatile 
economic crises of the depression. Luckily pills were still in 
high demand. And my grandma's thin fingers were stuffing pill 
jars seventy hours a week.  Pill jars were flying off the shelf to 
calm the nerves, cure the headaches, and upset stomachs of the 
people who had lost their jobs and livelihoods. 
   The only other industry doing well was booze. In Nineteen 
Nineteen the Federal government had passed a law the 
Volstead Act,which prohibited the sale of alcohol. This was 
popularly known as prohibition.  But the government did little 
to enforce the law. The production and distribution of 
liquor just moved to the black market.  A market in which my 
grandma's brothers already had many connections. 
   Prohibition was really more of a deregulation of the liquor 
industry, allowing anybody with a bathtub and a hot plate to get 
into the booming booze business.  
   So the eldest of my grandma's brothers began bootlegging 
from their tenement house downtown.  Grandma's father 
didn't have a taste for alcohol.  He hated the loose morals and 
fast life of his bootlegging sons.  Great Grandpa preferred 
building things that matter.
   
   My grandfather Bud had left the circus where he had gained 
a lot of people skills, as well as freak skills.  He could climb just 
about anything, even with his bowed legs. He could eat just 
about anything you set before him.   A skill he would later say 
came in handy with Grandma's cooking.   He was a good 
runner and a stand up guy.  So Grandma's brothers hired him 
to do some odd jobs. He would run cash where it was 
needed.  He would pick up ingredients for the home brew. Or 
even work the speakeasy door, in the basement of the 
tenement where grandma's brothers cooked up the booze.  
   Grandma's family would get together often, after she was 
out of the orphanage.  Grandma had learned to read and write. 
The nuns had seen to that.  She had only an eighth grade 
education but was by far the best educated of her whole 
family.  So the family often turned to her for paper work 
matters. Grandma would even read some stories to her sisters 
when they were not at the pill factory. Grandma's dexterous 
fingers turning the page of some popular romance 
novel.  Reading to her sisters in a studious, reverent, voice 
given to her by the nuns. She was close with her sisters and 
never resented for a moment her life in the orphanage.  
   Occasionally the girls would go visit their mother still 
institutionalized in the west of St. Louis.  They would take the 
trolley car that ran from down town city center, past Forest 
Park and walk to the quiet grounds of the asylum.  Great 
Grandma Maria would be there swinging through emotions 
from ecstasy to spite when greeting her children and then 
comfortably settle down in depression as the visit wore on.
   They would speak to her in Italian and relate what little 
gossip they could to her.  They never mentioned her husband. 
He had gone missing about a year after the stock crash and the 
loss of his business.  My grandma's family and neighborhood 
folks were sure he was dead.  There was even one story that 
implicated his sons.  Not that his sons out right murdered 
him.  Patricide is far too classical crime for my family.  There 
was some talk that Great Grandpa's backers at the building site 
hurt by the economic climate tried to put the squeeze on Great 
Grandpa's sons for some of their booze money.   The tight 
fisted brothers refused. Some people said that Great Grandpa's 
body drifted north up the Mississippi river all the way to the 
Great Lakes.
   
   My grandmother and grandfather met at the speakeasy in 
the basement her brothers' tenement on one of the few nights 
she went out.  They hit it off right away. 
   Grandpa related the story often.
   
    Now I met your grandma, when I was working with her 
brothers.  They were tough guys.  But real handsome boys, and 
they had some money so you could never meet a girl while you 
were around them. 
    This one night there was this beautiful girl I just couldn't 
resist.  I thought to myself this beauty, I've got to make her 
mine. 
    She had dark curly hair and a sweet face.  She was always 
looking down and glancing up real quickly.  Like she was shy 
or something.  But if you ask me she was just being coy.  So I 
am watching her flashing her pretty brown eyes, and long black 
eyelashes, brushing her long black hair. 
    I got up to go over to talk her I was as nervous as 
anything.  
   
    Did you ask her out? 
   
    Well, I got kinda scared and lost my nerve halfway to 
asking.  Which was strange because in the circus I had no 
problem talking to anyone, fat lady, bearded women, and 
contortionists.  But something about that angelic face of your 
grandma's got me second guessing myself. 
   
    Did she ask you out, Grandpa? 
   
    No but close. So I am loosing my nerve.  I feel my knees 
shaking and I cant find any thing to do with my hand so I start 
rubbing them through my hair.  Now I had a bit more hair 
back then and I wore Palm Aid at the time. Do you know what 
that is? 
   
    No grandpa. 
   
    It's kinda like old fashioned hair jell for men.  But it's real 
greasy, so my sweaty palms must have reacted with the grease 
and my hair is stuck up to a point on the top of my head.  Just 
then I catch your grandmother's pretty brown eyes looking at 
mine. And she just bursts out laughing. I go about as red as a 
tomato. Then I think all is lost when I see grandma's brother 
go over start talking to her.
   
    O' grandpa you're so silly. 
    I put my chubby little hand on his head, as we sat on the 
living room couch.  I was kneeling next to him to be at his 
height. I had both tuned out the television.  Angela was lying in 
her usual spot. Her hands propped up her head, as she was 
totally engrossed in Linda Carter as Wonder Woman.  Trying 
to hold on to the point of the story I said. 
    Grandpa, what's the problem with Grandma's brothers. 
   
    Nothing really, it was that I didn't know they were her 
brothers.  I thought I lost another one to the Romeos of the 
speakeasy. 
    Now your grandma was still laughing, so I know I made 
some kind of impression on her but she stopped everything 
and gave her brothers a kiss on the cheek. 
   
    Oh I get it. You thought they were together. 
   
    That's right son.  But the next thing I know Grandma's 
brother is walking over to me.  He says that he's got a job for 
me and its real important. 
   
    What's that, Grandpa? 
   
    He told me I got to walk his sister home.  And after that 
walk home, I never let her out of my sight. 
   
   Grandma and Grandpa were married soon after they 
met.  And for the first couple of years lived downtown.  Those 
were hard times and things felt as if they were falling apart. 
They scraped by, between the pill factory and the helping out 
the bootlegging.  
   They got by until in 1933 Prohibition was repealed and it 
became far too costly to be in the liquor business.  That added 
a bit of pain to their lives.  Grandma's brothers were broke and 
went missing for about ten years.  
   Grandpa got a job from the War Powers Act, building a 
large canal through the south side of St. Louis with runoff 
water from the Missouri river.
   They moved into the house on Edwards in the late 
forties  after the Second World War.  Grandma's sisters had 
gotten married to and moved out to the suburbs with some 
guys they had met in their brothers' speakeasy.  
   These men were country folk and not a single one of them 
an Italian. Nor were they Catholic.  But they had a little money 
and they could put food on the table.  And they were in 
love.  Which under those conditions was lucky to find. 
   
   So my grandmother was the only one of here family still 
living in the city of St Louis when they moved into the house 
on Edwards in the Italian neighborhood.  
   The family got the idea to try and take Great Grandma out 
of the institution.  She had been institutionalized, drugged and 
shocked for twenty years.  She was getting old and the doctors 
thought she had mellowed. They thought with the right home 
environment she might enjoy the last ten years of her life on 
the outside. 
   What's more they were in a quiet neighborhood in a two-
story house that afforded privacy. They could get some things 
from the old country. Great Grandma could go to mass with 
other Roman Catholics. 
   So Grandma and Grandpa set her up in the upstairs 
apartment.  The same one that my mother, I and Angela would 
later live in. 
   
   This change of living situation was not a smooth 
adjustment for anyone, especially Great Grandmother.  My 
grandparents were newly weds and like most Grandma was 
already pregnant with her first child. 
    There was no honeymoon period. They were both very 
busy just making ends meet.  The added pressure of a 
disturbed old woman who speaks almost no English didn't 
help.
   Great Grandmother could ask for a few necessary things in 
English, food, water, etc.  While expressing her emotions, she 
exclusively used Italian.  Except for the emotions of anger and 
disappointment.  It seems the orderlies at the institution had 
taught her to cuss like unstable postal worker, with a full bag of 
Christmas mail, and a rock in his shoe. 
   Grandpa had learned about that soon after their first 
meeting.   He met her only once before she moved in.  Great 
Grandma was powerfully disappointed by my grandfather's 
short stature and skinny build.  And the fact that he was not 
Catholic pushed that disappointment over to out right 
anger.  And the curses came so fluidly that Great Grandma 
needed to be restrained by orderlies and strapped to her bed. 
   
   Grandma was optimistic, even after such an inauspicious 
start, that a family could be made again.  She would be an 
orphan no longer.  
   Now I am not sure if this changed the relationship between 
Grandma and Grandpa.  Adding responsibility of children and 
the elderly are just those everyday sort of responsibilities, I have 
been raised to avoid.  But there is a certain warmth to the idea 
and reunification of family an almost impossible gesture of 
grace and salvation, like a donkey pulling a child out of a house 
fire.  
   So one Saturday, Grandma and Grandpa took the trolley 
car out past forest park and walked into the gates of City 
Hospital and took that black clad old woman home to their 
new home on Edwards.
   The adjustment was very hard to take.  The hopes that she 
could walk about the Italian neighborhood and go to church 
were dashed when Grandma and Grandpa discovered that she 
had lost what few people skills she had.  
   She, now, had no requisite shame about bodily functions, or 
many other taboo actions, that were necessary for civil 
society.    She would belch and fart. With no one to dress her, 
she would walk out on the porch totally naked.  Her wrinkled 
breasts covered only by her long thick white hair, which was 
ordinarily worn up under her black scarf. Her legs, arms and 
privates were covered in an unnatural fur as well.  These air 
baths happened infrequently but when they happened they 
would cause quite a scene, as the front porch was visible from 
way down the block and clear to every one leaving the bakery 
with fresh bread.  
   
    I got a real kick out of this! 
   
    Be quiet Bud.  Don't tell the kids about that. 
   
    Now Mary, its nothing too embarrassing.  It's just a little 
skin, the way God made us. 
   
    Yeah grandma, we really want to hear.  Tell us. 
   
    Well, my favorite thing, that would really get her, was when 
I agreed with her. 
   
    How's that, Grandpa? 
   
    Now my mother in-law your Great Grandma Maria was a 
tough lady. Sort of a witch too. 
   
    Bud, that's too much! 
   
    Listen kids, I don't mean any disrespect. I am not calling 
her a witch to describe her as a mean old woman, which she 
was. 
   
    Bud, please! 
   
    What I mean is, she was the sort of a witch, like in the 
storybooks. She could see things. Or at least  she saw things, all 
kinds of weird stuff. 
   
    Like what, Grandpa? Did she see ghosts? 
   
    Yes. She would see ghosts, animals, people, all kinds of 
things that other people couldn't see. 
   
    Grandma is that true? 
   
    Kids,   Grandma Mary says,  Great Grandma Maria was 
sick, and kinda touched in the head. 
   
    Listen to me kids. Grandma knows it's true she just 
doesn't want to scare you.  
   Grandpa leans in and holds us by the shoulders speaking 
very low.
    She had a sort of second sight. 
     
    Cool! Could she cast spells? 
   
    Well, she could cast things all right and would often be 
lecturing me from the back porch
    She'd be wearing black robes like your nuns at school, and 
some times nothing at all. She would yell down at me about 
some dream she had and would tell me to do some special 
thing that day so something bad wouldn't happen. 
   
    Like what? 
   
    Well, one day she tells me she had a dream that I got 
washed out to sea.  Now there ain't no sea nearby. But it did 
put me off a little 'cause I was working on river Des Peres, 
putting in stones for some water runoff.
    She said to me, 'Beware Bud Whacker.  You'a gonna' be 
washed in di mare you gunna' mori di mare,  mori di mare.' 
   
    Mare is the sea the sea? 
   
    Right you got it.  So, I just go ahead and agree with her.  I 
tell her Ok and then she gets real angry. 
   
    Why's that, Grandpa?  You agreed with her wouldn't she 
be pleased with that. 
   
    Well, when I agree with her I say OK and make the OK 
sign with my hand. You know, put my for finger and thumb 
like a circle and wave my hand about. 
   
    So what's wrong with that, Grandpa? 
   
    Well, you know how some hand gestures are bad? 
   
    Yeah, Matt flips the bird at Sister Fullashitta when she's not 
looking. 
   
    Grandma chimes in, they're just little kids bud what are you 
telling them this stuff for. 
   
    Nothing that I'm telling them that they haven't seen on 
that television, Mary.
    So yes, it's just like flipping the bird. The OK sign means 
something bad in Italy.
   
    What does it mean? 
   
    Your grandma is going to kill me but all right.  You see 
your finger and thumb make kinda' of a circle right? Here you 
do it. 
   
    Like this, Grandpa? 
   
    Yes. Wave your other fingers out. That circle is supposed 
to be your butt hole.  I guess the fingers are like hairs.  When 
you put that up to your lips, in Italian, you're telling someone to 
kiss you on the butt hole. 
   
    Cool! 
   
    Now don't tell your grandma or mother, and Sister 
Fullashitta would sure enough kill you if you do that to her. 
   
    OK! Grandpa,  I said, while waving that hand gesture away 
from my lips. 
   
    So just like this. I would agree with Great Grandma Maria 
every day. She'd get so angry and say a bunch of words that I 
can't explain to you until your older. 
   As if he couldn't resist a time worn impression of his 
mother in-law he repeated,  God Damn you Bud Whacker, 
God Damn you. 
   
   Only adding to the difficulty of caring for Great 
Grandmother was Grandma's brother Franco's return several 
years after they had moved into the house on 
Edwards.  Franco and Nickolas had suddenly quit town after 
prohibition ended, as their business was made redundant by 
the major breweries. The small guys could not complete, the 
standards were now too high.  
   The bathtub moonshine, which had been an old recipe for 
grappa, may have been classic, but could not make it along side 
the Anheuser Bushes and professional liquors makers. Their 
distribution lines had been severed and their speakeasy now 
irrelevant.  They had briefly toyed with the idea of going into a 
legitimate business of distributing liquor but the mob had 
already seized the main markets.
   We don't have a full account of where they went.  All we 
know is that Nicholas ended up in the Navy during world war 
two and Franco returned just after the war.
   
   Franco returned to St. Louis five years after the Second 
World War ended.  He found his way to Grandma and 
Grandpa's house on Edwards. Grandma and Grandpa had 
had three children by that time. In 1947 they had Betty 
Marie.  1948 they had William, 1949 they had Mary Nancy, my 
mother. 
   So the house on Edward's was crowded with a young 
family on the bottom floor and a crazy old woman on the top 
floor. 
    When he returned, Franco looked like a different man. He 
was often distracted. His keen sense of surrounding and skills 
of social interaction, which had made him a very successful 
bootlegger, seemed to have been erased.  He was no longer 
sharp young man.  He was a twitching shell often lost in 
thought.  He was ill groomed, not even paying attention to the 
most basic hygiene.  He had a greying beard and he was 
missing the middle finger on his right hand. What's more he 
now called himself Fritz instead of Franco.
   
   Grandma was moved to pity by the sight of Fritz. If she 
looked closely, at times, she could still see her brother behind 
the eyes. She made Fritz shave and cut his fingernails all nine of 
them. 
   The difficult part was getting Fritz and Great grandma Maria 
to live together in the four small rooms of the second floor of 
the Edwards house.  Great Grandma Maria had lost all of her 
motherly instincts over the years of institutionalization and did 
not even recognize Fritz as her son, even after his clean 
up.  Great Grandma Maria spent most of her time lying in bed 
depressed.  That left the three other rooms almost always free.
   
   Before Fritz arrived Betty, William and Mary Nancy would 
secretly play up there in the largely empty three rooms. Quietly 
trying to sneak a peek at their Grandma Maria with her long 
gray hair down.  
   They had heard their father's story that she was a witch and 
wanted to see if she was talking to the devil or some other evil 
minion. Was she looking into a crystal ball, perhaps they would 
even catch a glimpse of their own future.
   Little did my young mother know that her peeking at her 
crazy Grandma Maria lying depressed and wailing in the front 
bedroom depicted a fairly, accurate view of her own future. 
About 27 years later, my mother lay in that same bedroom with 
a towel over her head to bloc out the light while morning the 
loss of her love, as she was thrown into a deep depression, 
while trying to cope with the fact that her husband was leaving 
her for a woman he met overseas while away in the army.
   Perhaps Great grandma was a witch or at least a genetic 
looking glass reflecting this probable future.  
   
   After Fritz moved it became much more difficult for the 
children to go on a witch hunt.  Fritz liked to walk around 
naked and was most of the time fully intoxicated and half 
aroused with self-abuse, as he scribbled on the walls with paint 
he picked up at the dry goods market.
   He was painting his way through the cannon of french 
postcard he had won in a poker game at some point during his 
long post bootlegging travels.  Over the white walls of his 
room, kitchen and living room he had crudely painted 
pornographic pictures of french women spread eagle. 
Grandma Mary was shocked when she first saw them. She 
went after her brother with the broomstick, beating him about 
the face and hands.
   But this sort of criticism didn't keep Fritz from painting 
more women with their legs open and breasts out. Grandma 
must have begun to like some aspect of the paintings.  She 
stopped trying to repaint the walls after losing two nice new 
broomsticks and her best mop handle by breaking them over 
her brother's head.
   An artistic compromise was struck that turned into an 
artistic collaboration.  Grandma had left the pill factory after it 
had become automated. They no longer needed thin fingers to 
put the cotton balls.  Some re-tooled war instrument could now 
do it far faster than thin, fingered immigrant girls.  Anyway, 
Grandma's fingers were not a thin as they used to be, when 
she was pregnant first child her fingers ballooned-up to the 
size of sausages and after the birth, she did not regain thin 
youthful digits. 
   Grandma had been working in a patterns department of 
large Dry good store downtown.  Here they sold all sorts of 
patters for dresses and clothes, with which the modern 
housewife could make inexpensive clothes for their growing 
families.  She had learned how to sew on her lunch break from 
a seamstress who worked in the sewing machine department. 
With her second paycheck, she had purchased a sewing 
machine for the home.  She kept it in her bedroom and while 
Bud would sleep she would be making clothes and pot-holders 
long into the night.  So it was with this tool Grandma 
discovered how to deal with the nude pictures that Fritz was 
painting on the wall.  She would take the most fashionable 
patterns that they had on display and with discarded scraps of 
material make real clothes for the naked french lady that fritz 
painted on white walls. She stuck them to the wall with staples 
and gooey white wallpaper paste.  If it was a skirt, Fritz could 
still peruse the entire pornographic portrait. 
   
   One particularly disturbing portrait was of a young french 
girl sitting straight on a tall stool, her long black hair was 
shoulder length just above her tight corset bustier.  Her thin 
white legs were spread, but just where her vulva was supposed 
to be a picture of the Virgin Mary was drawn. Her white robes 
and head dress mimicking the woman's vulva. Grandma was 
very disturbed by this one not only because it was 
blasphemous but also because it was so suggestive.  Grandma 
had never seen the resemblance to images of the Virgin Mary 
and the female pudenda.  But now that she had, she could not 
help but make that same perverted connection every time she 
saw one.  She would often caution us not to pray in front of 
the statute of Mary for too long perhaps as it was unseemly to 
have to young children praying before some monster cunt.  My 
sister and I could have never understood or suspected her 
hesitation of us praying before Mary.
   This all came out the day we told my aging grandmother 
that her granddaughter was gay and was going to marry 
another woman. 
    Angela should have been praying to Jesus more,  
Grandma said.   Staring all day into that statue of Mary messed 
her up.  It's my fault.  All those Hail Marys and Rosary must 
have turned her funny.  
   
   Word of this erotic home decor spread around the 
neighborhood.  Both curious children and grown men would 
try and get a glimpse of this exhibition.  The Italian mail man 
would often loiter taking a coffee or lemon Cello with Fritz, 
ogling the paintings pretending of course that he was just 
dropping off the mail or innocently chatting.
   Great Grandma did not like the company and a visiting art 
lover could easily get more show than he bargained for if the 
old woman's depressed sleep was disturbed.  She would rush 
out of her room more vividly naked than any french postcard 
and cussing like a banshee. 
   
   Fritz often teased the neighbor children.  When he left the 
house to get some piece of cheese or beer he would carry cane 
for a walking stick. With this cane he would catch the legs of 
neighborhood children,  who would scream and run away, sure 
that they would be taken back to the scary two story building 
with the witch by her deranged son.  
   Grandma Mary and Grandpa Bud soon started to resent 
Fritz's shameless behavior, and were often at a loss to explain it 
to the neighbors.  Fritz had grown dangerous like a wild 
animal. Grandma tried to constantly groom and shave him in 
an attempt to make him look more normal. But the pressure of 
children and a job, she would fall behind on haircuts and 
Fritz's hair grew long and his face was more often than not 
covered with some kind of half grown beard.  His teeth were 
falling out and if you happened to be unfortunate enough to be 
on the receiving end of one of his pleasant smiles you would 
have been smacked in the face with a wall of sickly halitosis.
   As if that wasn't enough, just a few days per month both 
mother and sons peek crazy cycles would overlap like some 
perfect storm, natural disaster, or biological disaster. During 
one of these episodes had the police arrived.  They hauled Fritz 
away as he hung naked from the second story window by a 
sheet tied to the banister.  The police arrived just as the naked 
Great Grandmother Maria was cutting the sheet with a carving 
knife.
   
   After this the hopes of a reunited family were dashed. And 
Fritz was put away under court order by the state, in the same 
ward his mother had lived for those twenty years.
   
   The fact that great grandma and her son Franco/Fritz  were 
crazy was well documented both clinically and anecdotally. But 
all her other children had a share of it too. None of them 
except Fritz was institutionalized.  All of grandma siblings were 
slightly slow, and saw the world at a different speed. Not that 
they were retarded or even half. It is as if they were just on 
some other frequency that set them apart from normal 
people.  They were not witty like my grandpa.  They could not 
lie. My grandma would stress out at the slightest attempt at 
dissembling truth. Her two sisters and one brother nick were 
the same.  The four of them were naive and gullible their entire 
life.  They were totally authentic and never hid their true selves 
and lucky for the world they happened to be good people on 
top of it.  But this simplicity, with which Grandma and her 
siblings approached life, had to be explained by the people 
around them. Their husbands and wives not wanting to believe 
their marriage partners all inherited this slowness of thought 
and what's worse passed it on to their mutual children, believed 
a fictitious theory of events designed to explain away this 
genetic retardation through environmental factors.
   
   Every one of my Grandmother's siblings has a famous 
story of how they received a large blow on the head after which 
they were never quite the same. 
   
   Nickolas Grandma's brother has the most patriotic 
story.  After the bootlegging fell through in the late depression 
Nicolas set out with his brother.  They drifted for a while but 
they ended up separating and Nickolas joined the Navy.  Now 
he joined the day of Pearl Harbor attack but not out of 
patriotism. He hadn't read the paper.  He just wanted to do 
something.  He was stationed on a mid sized supply ship and 
they had taught him to work with pipes and use a mop. He still 
looked like a strong Italian but had lost some of his youthful 
confidence along with his brother and the bootlegging 
business.  He was like a different man.  He was in a totally 
unfamiliar environment in the big ocean on a little boat.  There 
is a story he tells that he was going below deck after having a 
smoke. Just as he was climbing down a ladder the hatch door 
on the gangway came loose and knocked him on the head. It 
knocked him eight feet off the ladder and the ships doctor said 
it knocked three teeth straight out of is head as easy as a child 
spitting out candy corn.  It broke his skull, and after that his left 
eyelid never fully opened. It gave the impression that he was 
always intensely interested in anyone that he even casually 
glanced at.  So God takes with one hand and gives with the 
other.
    
   Grandma's head injury story took place in the Old 
Cathedral adjacent to her orphanage in Downtown St. Louis. 
And for what it lacked in patriotism it makes up in religious 
conviction.  In Grandma's orphanage the children would rotate 
shifts helping out in the sacristy and the church.   These 
children would leave the bare unadorned walls of the crowded 
dorm and canteen, and find themselves in the open vault of 
church. On the walls were hung the stations of the cross, 12 
large baroque paintings that depicted Jesus' trial and 
Crucifixion.  They were beautiful and gory. Grandma would 
think how small her own trials were by comparison, while 
mopping the floors and dusting the pews.  There was a 
hemispherical vault at the front of the church. Marble pillars 
were set inside it and a large cross with a life-like, crucified Jesus 
hung in the center.  Colored light came streaming in through 
the stained glass windows. The sounds of child labor echoed 
upon the stone walls as the children finished cleaning and 
maintaining every part of the old church.  Still church duty was 
by far better than the chores one would do in the dank dark 
smelly rooms of the orphanage.   On church duty, they felt 
there work was important.  Like cleaning the house of a 
millionaire or the president.  And every time you looked toward 
the alter and got a glimpse of Christ or cleaned the bare feet of 
the Mother Mary statue it was like you were interacting with 
greatness.   With amicable praise from a superior, maybe life as 
an orphan is not that different to life in heaven.  Grandma was 
finding a cosmic common ground cleaning statuesque toe-jam 
from between mother Mary's marble toes.
   
   By far her and all the other orphans favorite chore was 
ringing the bells.  Every hour from 5 in the morning until eight 
at night the children were responsible for ringing the church 
bells.  They would climb above the vaulted ceilings of the 
church up the cork-screw stairs of the steeple.  Then they 
would pass the heavy wooden trap door of the belfry.  Four 
children would go up.  It would take the weight of two pulling 
on the string of the bell and the other two were there as 
spotters and time keepers making sure the bell ringing was in 
order.  One day my grandma was dawdling spending some 
extra time before the statue of Mary.  Praying hard for her 
family.  She watched as the offering candles burned.  She 
wanted so badly to light one herself. But she had no money to 
put in the gilded box in exchange for lighting the candle.  No 
one was looking, she simply could have taken the punk and lit 
the candle.  She was debating whether the sin of lighting a 
candle without paying, was more harmful to herself, than 
would be the benefit of lighting a candle for her family.  She so 
wanted to see the glowing flame of concern for her family, 
there in front of Mary.  Then, Mother Mary could gaze down 
upon the flame and be reminded of Grandma's love for her 
family and intercede for her, to put in a good word to God to 
grant happiness and health for her whole family. The benefits 
of the offering my Grandmother thought clearly out weighed 
the sin.  She could simply confess the small sin later.  It was no 
more a sin, she thought, than stealing a piece of penny candy 
or thinking bad thoughts about one of the nuns.  So, she knelt 
there in front of Mary and took a balsa wood punk from 
beside the candles and after lighting the punk on the candle 
closest to her, she lit one of the red candles sitting there before 
the statue of Mary.  Just as she began her prayer she herd the 
church bell begin to ring. She set out like a shot, before even 
saying amen. She ran toward the staircase that lead to the 
steeple. As she was climbing up the spiral staircase, they had 
already rung the bell 9 times. The trap door was open and she 
could see two of her orphans friends hanging from the bell 
rope using their full body weight to ring the bell. She was 
sprinting up the last few stairs, when the rope broke loose 
from the bell and her friends were thrown to the floor.  Their 
weight knocked the trap door shut just on Grandma's head, 
just as it was poking through the trap hole of the floor.   She 
woke up a day later with twenty stitches in her head and a 
broken ankle.
   
   Grandma's thinking became more and more clouded as the 
years went on.  She was a believer in theological causation.  She 
believed she and her family owed a cosmic debt for actions 
that others committed.  For example her granddaughter would 
later become gay from praying to Mary because her brother 
Fritz had offended Mary by so rudely pointing out the fact that 
her image looked like a woman's genitals.  
    I would suffer embarrassment on the first mass I was 
serving as part of this cosmic debt.  The veracity of this thesis 
is largely unimportant. And perhaps demonstrates the peculiar 
nature of my grandma's insanity. As she could only interpret 
the payment of these debts after they were transacted.  She 
could not like her mother, predict when and how these cosmic 
karmic transactions would take place.  She did however instill in 
me a legalistic view of the Catholic religion.  There were rules 
and edicts from the Pope, there were commandments and 
there was the odd logic of the heavens as my Grandmother 
saw it.  When I was young I held all these rules as equally 
true.  For example, thou shall not kill,  an ex cathedra statement 
from the Pope, or my grandma's belief that the Virgin Mary 
will turn you gay, held the same deontological value.  I lived in a 
spiritual universe inhabited by Catholic mysteries, arbitrary daily 
rituals and wild idiosyncratic superstition.  
   
   
   







8 HUSKY SERVES HIS FIRST MASS


At ten years old I began to serve Catholic mass. Our small class 
of boys would be alter boys for St. Ambrose church.  An alter 
boy assists the priest in the sacred rights of mass. It also means 
that you get closer to priests than ever before, sometimes much 
closer than you like.  Mass was held three times a day everyday 
and four times on Sunday.  The 4th and 5th grade boys would 
rotate serving these weekly.   Matt Goodman and I would 
often be paired up. 
   
   It was a Saturday night and Grandma had just been at the 
sewing machine altering my vestments.  Angela was lying on 
the floor her head propped on her hands watching TV.  I was 
lying on the couch.  It was getting late and we had gotten used 
to our mother not coming home.  So we distracted ourselves 
with the last half hour of a seventies crime show that we barely 
understood. 
   Beretta was a streetwise, tough guy fighting crime, on his 
own terms, as an undercover cop.  He wore a page boy hat and 
had a pet cockatoo like a pirate. We liked the bird.  (I am not 
sure if it is a real episode or a fever dream, but I remember 
having nightmares that some retarded person staying with 
Beretta cooked and ate his bird.  I remember Beretta was crying 
when he got back to his dingy apartment and saw feathers on 
the floor. We were crying.) 
   
   Grandma put us to bed before the news had finished,   you 
have a big day tomorrow you need to get your rest.   
   Mom had not come home Friday night either. We  had 
slept downstairs at grandma and grandpa's, as we had been 
doing more and more often since our father left.
   
   I had a hard time getting to sleep that night. I had prayed.  
The scapula was around my neck, just in case I got up to use 
the bathroom, accidentally fell and  hit my head and died 
before I got a chance to ask for forgiveness. 
   I had said my prayers for my father who I had not seen 
now for almost two years. I had not even talked to him on the 
phone or received a letter or birthday present.  Mom told me 
he was very busy, on the rare occasions that I actually 
articulated his absence. On most days I just went with the flow. 
I had Grandma, Grandpa, Mom and Angela who needed 
anyone else.  I had become jaded and tired of hoping that he 
might one day come back.  I also had given up mistaking other 
men for my father.
    I remember one school day I saw an unfamiliar man in the 
hall.  His back was turned to me and he was talking to Sister 
Fullamina,  the nice first grade home room teacher. My heart 
beat with anticipation and I was actually starting to get 
embarrassed by my own flood of  happy emotion.  But he 
turned around and it was just some other dad.  That was 
probably one of the most puzzling days in my life up to that 
point.  My body, thorough it visceral articulation of wild hope, 
had reminded my semi-conscious mind how much I truly 
missed him. I was  at loss to explain it. I simply would pray 
through it, as I did this night.  I wondered about my Mom and 
wanted so badly to hear the car door and high heeled foot 
steps, that meant she was heading home.  But I drifted off to 
sleep with the sound of the late news.
   
   At daybreak Sunday morning, Mom quietly let herself into 
Grandma and Grandpa's apartment with her own 
key.  Everyone in the house was asleep. She was wearing a 
short dress and jacket. Her blond hair and clothes smelled 
noticeably of smoke.  But there was also a powerful smell of 
food. She was holding a bag of McDonald's egg MC muffins.  
She woke us up and snuck us out of the house before 
Grandma and Grandpa woke up. She walked up the stairs 
behind us in the house. And as we waited on the porch with 
our blankets wrapped around us, she fished in her small purse 
for our apartment key.  Angela was still half asleep and yawning 
with the cover pulled over her head like a green , wool, virgin 
Mary.  I was wide-awake and looking forward to the 
McDonald's.  After finding the key she opened the door.   The 
house was cold. We sat at the table still in our covers. Mom put 
the McDonald's on the white table and I dove in.  Mom went 
to the refrigerator opening it with one hand and eating her 
hash-brown with the other.  She poured us two glasses of milk 
and set them down next to us, with a kiss to our cheeks.  I was 
already distracted by eating, and like a dog with a bone, I pulled 
away as she went in for the kiss. 
   
    Well, Greg,  it's  a big day today. 
   
    Yeah, I was worried you were going to miss it.  
   
   I was not upset at my mother, but just transferring my anger 
at the fact that I had so quickly finished my delicious sausage 
and egg sandwich and I could clearly see that Angela had a 
good three-fourths left.  She was just picking at it, taunting me. 
   
    Of course not Greg,  my mother said defensively, and 
continued more angrily,  now, you know I have to go out,  
now switching to almost pure despair,  that father of yours 
that's why I have to go out at night. 
   
    Changing the subject Mom asked,   Who are you serving 
with today? 
   
    Mat Goodman,   I said. As he was the well known smart 
kid and a cool guy so it was kind of an honor to be paired up 
with him.
    Kreisman and Goodman,  my mother said,  you are 
paired up because he was a half Jew too. 
   
    No, he's not he's catholic like me. 
   
    If he was a Jew, he never admitted it. , said Mom
   
    He said that he was German and he was from the North. 
   
    Do you know how to spell his name?   Mom asks.  If 
you're not a Jew you have two n's on the end of a name like 
his. 
   
   I wasn't a good speller and told her I had no Idea.
   
   Mom cleared the table and said,  You should start spelling 
your name with two n's. Angela why don't you go and watch 
some TV, I want to talk to Greg about his mass 
   
   Angela leaves and plops down on the couch the cover 
wrapped around her.  She leaves the table with half a sandwich 
left. And without asking I pound on and gobble the thing 
down, drinking the last sips of her milk to wash it down my 
gullet.
   
   Once Angela left the room my mother repeated herself.  
 You really should start spelling your name with two N's.  You 
know 'Kreismann.' 
   
    Why's that mom? 
   
    So they don't think you a dirty Jew like you father.  Greg 
you are a big boy today so I can tell you.  I should have never 
married that man. 
   
   Whenever Mom would talk about our father it was as if she 
hit a land mind of obsessive thought and then she would 
continue in a tirade of anger and desperation.
   
    You know he is not coming back Greg, He is not coming 
back.  He left us.  He left me. He left you, He left your little 
sister. O god,  O god he is really gone.   She began to cry.  
 But don't tell your sister. Oh my lord he's not coming back! 
   
   I had long suspected something was up he had been 
overseas for two years.  Grandpa had been telling us stories 
loosely veiled as cute animal stories, all of which included a 
father that didn't return.  I had thought he was dead for a while 
and was at least comforted by the fact that my prayers may 
reach him in purgatory.
   
   Mom continued,  That weak little man found someone 
else.  Some other family.  He's probably loving some other son 
right now.  He acts like we don't exist. 
    Mom's mascara ran as she scooted her chair next to 
mine.  I had unwittingly been put in the position of jilted lover's 
confidence and counseling for my mother.  A pattern that 
would be repeated numerous times in my later life by her and 
other women who saw me as just a friend they could talk to. 
   
    Greg,  she said slightly composing herself,  you're a big 
boy now.   You're the man of the house.  Now, lets try on that 
black hassock of yours. 
   Mom took the altered hassock from the bag. (A hassock is 
the special alter boy vestments. ) She had swiped it from 
grandma's house when she let herself in to get us.  She would 
often take things on the sly she had very sticky fingers and a 
light touch.  She was an artist with the clever distraction and 
grab. And almost always got away with it.
   
    Look at you in your black hassock.  You're ready to serve 
mass.  You're a little man, that's what you are. 
   
   The fact was that I was so big my grandma had to sew in 
another black panel into the hassock to accommodate my 
growing belly.
   
    Kent that wandering Jew, has wandered away but don't 
you worry your mom's still beautiful right?  she said, flatting 
last nights dress against her slim figure. Her freshly died hair 
smelled like peroxide and heavy mascara was running, down 
her face.
    You know I have been going out at night. 
   
    Where are you going?  I asked. 
   
    Well, you know Mickey De'Angelo's mother.  She's kind of 
lonely too, since her husband is in the penitentiary.  She's 
taking me to these places where you can meet men to marry 
you.  I am going to find you and your sister a good daddy and 
get you some insurance. I  am going to find me a husband that 
won't run out on me. 
    Not a doctor.  You think you're going to get someone 
good by marrying a Doctor but they are really just self-
absorbed tiny men always chasing after nurses. This place there 
are different kind a men, real men.  Men that work for a living 
in factory's and stuff. 
   
    What kind of a place is it?  I asked.
   
    Well, its sort of a club house for adult people. Like a club 
house you might have with your friends.  And not one of the 
guys there is a Jew.  They all have good union jobs and work at 
least 60 hours a week. That over time money is really 
good.  And they all got insurance for your teeth. 
     She grabs me by the face and purses my lips open 
revealing an adult tooth that is growing in 30 degrees from 
straight.   'Cause you're going to need braces. I am sure. 
   
   So this was my first mass.  I had to choke back some tears 
for the loss of my father.   But it passed, as he had already 
been gone for a couple years, longer even than Mickey d' 
Angelo's father had been in the penitentiary. But it still was a 
shock. And with the confession that my  mother was out there 
looking for another husband, excited all sorts of mixed 
emotions.  On the one hand, I was not sure I wanted a new 
father, if the original one was not coming back.  I already had a 
grandpa that I practically lived with,  so I was emotionally 
covered.  And the thought of sharing my mother with other 
people made me jealous.  Since my father left we had been 
spending less and less time with our mother.  She was busy 
working, and up to other things, now, apparently.  I did not 
want to loose her too.  But she just hugged me and 
straightened my vestments.
   
   Looking in the full-length mirror, I saw myself. The 
slimming black vestments covered my belly and I thought I 
looked pretty good.  My bleach blond mother was wiping away 
her running mascara and straightening my bowl cut hair 
cut.  My sister walked back from the living room and passed as 
my mother is giving me a big hug from behind.  I could feel 
my mother's wet cheeks on mine and her flittering eyelashes 
brush against my skin ever so slightly.  
   
    Greg you look lie a big fat dork. I hope you trip in your 
dress. 
   
    Shut up Angela. It's not a dress.  I am wearing vestments. 
   
   That’s right Angela, these are vestments. And your brother 
looks very good in these. Very slimming.  I wish he could wear 
these every day  
   
   Mom turned toward me, after wetting her thumb and fore 
finger with her tongue, wiped off the bits of black goop she 
had left on my face from her last strong embrace,   yes, you 
look very good indeed. 
   
   I took the vestments off just as my grandma had come 
upstairs to the second floor.  Grandma wanted to get a look at 
me before mass. She had painstakingly searched for more 
black material to extend the vestments for me and was proud 
of her work.  
    
    What time did you get in dear,  Grandma asked Mom.
   
    Late last night, I thought I'd let the kids sleep until 
morning, isn't that right kids. , Mom said.
   
    Oh, I see you fixed them breakfast too.  Grandma stated, 
inspecting the leftover fast food wrappers.  The vestments 
look great on Greg.   
   
    Yeah, Grandma I look really good.  I said proudly
   
    Well, you better get going 11 o'clock mass starts in an hour 
and you have to be there a half hour before.  Grandma said as 
she neatly folded the vestments and put them in a brown paper 
bag for me to carry.  We will see you there. 
   
    Be strong my little man,  my mother repeated as I head out 
the door.
   
   On my way to mass I ran into Matt Goodman.  He was 
carrying his vestments slung over his shoulder like a sports 
jacket.  He looked like a young catalog model for catholic 
supply.  
   
    Hey tubs,  what's in the sack?  Is that a snack for mass? 
   
    Shut up Matt.  It's my vestments,  I said proudly opening 
up and pulling out the corner. 
   
    'Oh you found some that fit you,  tubby? 
   
    Yeah they fit me.  I was dreading taking them out I was 
embarrassed that my Grandmother's alterations would be 
instantly noticeable to him and everyone else and I would have 
to endure the humiliation of being on the alter caught out for 
being so fat my vestments need extensions.  It was as if the 
jokes just wrote themselves.   I mean really the vestment is the 
religious equivalent of the moo-moo, not a garment you usually 
alter with extensions.  
   
   We walked around to the side of the Church and let 
ourselves into the sacristy.  Alter boys have almost unlimited 
access to the sacristy. We can handle every type of religious 
paraphernalia, from incense burners to golden chalices. My 
favorite was a monstrance, which is a gaudy golden cross as 
heavy as a candelabra but with a circular glass hole in which a 
white host was placed. In some ways it looked like a baroque 
piece of optical equipment, perhaps God's magnifying glass. 
   
   When we entered the sacristy we put on our vestments and 
started to prepare the things we need for mass.  There are 
numerous important aspects to  the ceremony of catholic mass, 
to which the alter boy lends his expert assistance. There was 
the carrying and offering of the cruets of water and wine that 
would be transmogrified into the blood of Christ. Unpacking 
the vocabulary and theological ideas that goes in to this task is a 
difficult job for an adult, but as a child you willingly and 
unquestioningly absorb the lingo, gestures, and ideas.  Take, for 
example the 'cruet of wine'.  When would a 9 year old south 
side, half Jew from a blue collar family ever come across 'a 
cruet' outside the church. In the sacristy there were tens of pairs 
of these crystal flasks with tiny golden stoppers.  The alter boys 
would prepare the cruets for the mass in the host in wine room 
in the back of the sacristy.  On a low table, easily accessible to 
even the shortest alter boy usually sat 5 large jugs of church 
wine.  We would transfer the wine from the jug to the cruet. It 
would take two alter boys. One to hold the cruet and funnel 
and the other to poor the wine.  It was no real problem if you 
spilled any, as the wine is not yet sacred. It probably has been 
blessed to some degree, almost everything in a Church 
is.  There were even rumors about a blessing for toilet paper 
that would keep single ply papers from breaking at critical 
moments. This wine was just about that holy.  You could spill 
it, with no long term metaphysical problems, as it  had not yet 
become the blood of Christ.  Thus any one moderately holy, 
so any catholic, and probably some special Protestants could 
freely drink the wine with out committing a mortal sin.  
   We were regularly asked to fill the priest private flasks with 
this alter wine. One priest in particular would ask us to fill his 
flask before and after mass.  He had emptied out a small 
shampoo bottle and used this as his mass flask.  The label had 
long ago peeled off.  Matt thought it was an old Pert Plus 
bottle. But I was sure it was Head and Shoulders dandruff 
shampoo bottle.  Father Glenn clearly had a dandruff problem 
which was easily visible on his dark black shirt and jacket. But 
you could tell by his greasy hair that it must have taken a full 
year to empty that bottle with regular use. We were always 
amazed at Father Glenn's ability to drink that full bottle of alter 
wine during the actual mass ceremony.  Of course he would 
take a big swig before we went out to the alter. He would then 
stuff it up the billowy sleeves of his mass vestments and secure 
it in his waist band of his pants under the outer garb.  He 
would have another opportunity to swig when the lector, 
usually some nun or lay person who was extremely holy, would 
come to the alter and deliver the first reading.  He understood 
from years of experience that the attention of the Church going 
audience would be directed at the lector, that is if any one at all 
were paying attention, and he would turn slightly as if to cough 
and gulp down another big drink.  He did not try to hide it 
from the alter boys who were sitting beside him.  On the alter it 
was as if we were on stage of a late night talk show.  The priest 
was host and the alter boys were the forgettable side 
kicks.  When attention was turned to the readings, it was time 
for the host to relax while the next guest was performing their 
bit.  
   Older alter boys often bragged about their furtive exploits 
during this downtime.
   
    You can like so easily pick your nose and wipe it on old 
father Ross.  Ray, a fifth grader bragged.
   
    Oh yeah, he's half dead, I even have to help him up the 
stairs, to the alter, but don't do it to Father Bob,  he'll catch you 
for sure.  Dan a sixth grader added.
   
    Yeah, but I what I like to do is get a belly of alter wine 
before I go out there and eat a few hosts.  Ray said. 
   
   'Of course, you gotta drink something with those.  Dan 
replied.
   
    What's best is you can totally be looking at some girl in the 
mass and just have a raging boner and no one can see it 
because of the vestments.  
   
    Oh, Suzy with the boobies right? 
   
    And her mom.  
   
    Eww, Ray! 
   
    Come on, Dan, you know she's hot. 
   
    You're a mother fucker. 
   
   Ray and  Dan were older and could cuss and talk about 
boners without turning red.  But not me.
   I had eaten the hosts, round white and totally bland, pieces 
of formed bleached wheat. They looked like circular pieces of 
card stock.  They came in bags by the thousands packed inside 
a cardboard box.  They had religious symbols pressed into 
them forming reliefs of crosses, sacred hearts and, lambs.  It 
was like an industrial sized box of the blandest children's 
breakfast cereal imaginable. I think most of the other alter boys 
ate the hosts as a dare, the thrill of stealing or doing something 
naughty. And of course they ate them because the famous after 
school movie excuse, peer pressure. But like the alter wine the 
hosts may have had some minor blessing but they hand not be 
transmogrified into the body of Christ. And eating hosts no 
matter how naughty it may have felt was not even a venial sin 
by my reckoning. 
    I enjoyed the hosts on a whole other level and according to 
my gastronomic aesthetic. Having tasted communion hosts for 
the first time only months before becoming an alter boy my 
mind raced with culinary ideas in that time before I had access 
to them.  On my many raids of the refrigerator I thought how 
wonderful it would be to have these hosts as the base of some 
elegant sandwich.  I imagined that braunshweiger spread thickly 
on a host with a pickle slice and dollop of mustard would be 
the closest thing to the food of the gods or something that a 
rich person with top hat and monocle might eat.  And now 
there I was with access to all of these.  I didn't see it a stealing 
either as my chubby hands stuffed fistfuls of communion 
hosts into my husky pants pockets.  It was manifest destiny 
ordained by God. Who better to have these than a true believer 
in food.  And far from a desperate and despicable act of a 
glutton, this was a heroic gesture, a making the world, one 
sandwich at a time, a pure act of free will and devotion that 
made the angels themselves weep.
   
   And of course there was wine drinking but this was usually 
after a mass.  Especially after eleven o'clock mass. I had no 
special aesthetic for drinking the wine. For  me drinking 
wine  was guided in equal parts of goading by older alter boys 
and my own ability to drink really quickly.  I had an especially 
loose gullet for a nine year old. I believe this came about from 
numerous occasions of near choking on poorly chewed 
mouthfuls of stolen food.  I could not swallow something 
whole I usually only need to bite the thing in half to get it 
down.  Sometimes I even imagined I could unhinge my jaw like 
a python.  This solid food skill transferred quite nicely to 
liquids.  By the time I was eight I could drink a thirty-two ounce 
big gulp without taking a breath.  I would do it on a dare. But 
possibly more sadly I would do it on my own drowning my 
sorrow after having spent all my allowance on Donkey Kong at 
the Seven Eleven.  But as for wine and other intoxicants I 
didn't care a thing about them.  So to me wine was just some 
other liquid that I could drink to fill my stomach.  And impress 
my friends by emptying an entire cruet in one go. 
   
   
   But this was my first mass, and Matt and I were busily and 
solemnly preparing for the mass, no eating of host or sipping 
of wine.
   
   We had filled the cruets of wine and water and taken about 
one hundred hosts and prepared them on a large golden plate. 
We placed both of these on a small table just outside the alter 
area.  Later during the mass they would be offered by one of 
the congregation and we would receive them, and like a wife 
receiving delivery groceries, begin to prepare the meal.
   
   We were in our black vestments anxiously waiting for the 
mass to begin.  Matt's skinny frame seemed to accentuate how 
big I actually was.  In the large room of the sacristy, Father 
Glenn was putting on his colorful robes over his simple black 
priest outfit.  His robes were made of thick material that draped 
over his body.  He wore a long green sash with a lamb on one 
side and a crook and cross on the other.   He held a staff in his 
hand.  This was going  to be high mass so there would be 
procession so we would enter the church through the front 
door once the entire congregation was seated.  When you have 
a procession the priest requires that you prepare the incense 
burner.  This requires that we light a piece of charcoal so it is 
white hot for procession time.  The incense burner is a small 
gilded bucket on a long golden chain. They call it a censor.  The 
charcoal much like the kind you use in the barbecue pit.  Except 
this one has a cross on it.   You set it in the gilded metal bucket 
and put a drop or two of lighter fluid on top of the 
charcoal.  Then carefully take a match to it.  After a momentary 
bright flame, the charcoal burns with a red hot glow.  Matt did 
the lighting of the charcoal I was not very comfortable yet with 
the lighter fluid.  So before 11 a.m. we get to dress in robes, 
handle liquor and play with fire.
   
   We walked around to the front of the church. The 
congregation had already arrived and taken their seats.  Father 
Glenn was carrying the staff and Matt had given me the 
incense burner to hold. He was holding a cup full of 
incense.    The processions are interesting.  There is a great 
amount of pomp and ceremony.  The crowd had been asked 
to stand, the organ was playing loudly and the truly devout 
patrons began to sing enthusiastically while the rest were just 
mouthing the words.  We proceeded up the aisle.  I could feel 
the incense burner hot on my fat thigh.  It was a little heavy 
and I was holding the chain which was wrapped twice around 
my chubby little hand.  We stopped half way down the aisle. 
Father Glenn motioned for the incense burner.  He grabbed 
the chain, but was unable to release it from my hand. Thinking 
quickly I just extended my arm in his direction. And he was 
able to place some of the incense which Matt was holding on 
top of the smoldering charcoal. The incense billowed out in a 
fragrant white cloud.  Still unable to release my hand from the 
chain, Father Glenn was forced to swing the incense burner at 
the congregation with my hand still attached. I awkwardly 
leaned in each direction as he turned blessing the congregation. 
My hand extended like a heil Hitler.
   
   I saw my sister in the congregation she was being restrained 
by my mother for laughing. But she was not the only member 
of the church laughing.  At that moment, other muted giggles 
could be heard along with some exasperated sighs.  
   
   We continued up toward the alter and Father Glenn blessed 
it. I again leaned awkwardly with each blessing.  I kinda got the 
feeling that he was beginning to enjoy my discomfort and even 
did a few more swings at the congregation.  I was dizzy not 
only from rocking back and forth with the blessings, but 
because I had inhaled a good bit of incense smoke. My chubby 
fingers were now blue from constriction.  But I soldiered 
through.  All the while I was confessing just in case I died from 
incense inhalation or of hand strangulation.  
   
   Mat and I made it to our seats. The attention was directed 
to Father Glenn as he welcomed the parishioners.   With the 
attention off us, Matt helped me untangle the chain from my 
hand. He could barely contain himself.  But I could tell he 
noticed that I was actually quite embarrassed and a little sick. So 
he took it easy on me.
   
   The mass continued and we had a long rest during the 
readings and the priest's sermon.  During this time I scanned 
the congregation to look for familiar faces, classmates and 
neighbors.  I watched my mother, my sister, and my 
grandmother. They were near the front and nodding off 
during father Glenn's long monologue.  Every once in a while I 
caught my mom's eye and she gave a little wave to me.  I 
looked away turning red with embarrassment.  Now I knew I 
kinda blew the first part without being able to let go of the 
censor's chain, but I had a good feeling about the next part. 
   
   After the sermon, the organ played another hymn and we 
began the process of transubstantiation, turning the bread and 
wine into the body and blood of Christ.  This was my favorite 
part because it was half cooking and half Frankenstein movie.
   
   The cooking part of transubstantiation is pretty straight 
forward.  During the hymn after the reading, some chosen 
people would bring the cruets of wine and water and the hosts 
up to the alter.  Then the priest using the recipe creates the meal 
from these offerings. Then distributes them to the whole 
congregation.  Straight up food service, just like at the grocery 
store deli.
   
   The Frankenstein part was the fun stuff.  On the alter, there 
is a high alter which is a large marble table. Not unlike Dr. 
Frankenstein's work table. Or some other thing out of a creepy 
horror movie. And do I need to remind you that above and 
slightly behind this alter is a very graphic statue of a half naked 
man being tortured to death.  What's more all Catholic alters 
have some relic of a saint. That usually means some small 
bone, like the pinkie or little toe. Our alter had a chunk of rib 
from St. Ambrose.
   
   We alter boys are like the Igor's to father Frankenstein, 
doing all the thankless prep work that make father 
Frankenstein able to turn this simple bread and wine into the 
body and blood of Christ.  One of these tasks is lighting the 
candles around  the four corners of the alter.  In this way the 
alter table is prepared for the conversion of the food into life.
   
   Matt went with father Glenn to the alter gate to receive the 
gifts. I was being a good little Igor, lighting the candles at the 
corner of the alter.  I had rehearsed this act tens of times in 
alter boy training and orientation.  You simply take the punk 
from a votive offering beside the statue of Mary on the left side 
of the alter, light the punk on one of the votive candles. Then 
guarding the flaming punk with one hand walk to the nearest 
alter candle and light it. Then continue around the alter and 
light the other three.
   
   But when I got to the votive candles in front of the statue 
of Mary I found the normal balsa punks had been replaced by 
a sandy punk.  You might know about these punks from the 
forth of July or some other holiday when you light fire works. 
If you have a sandy punk it is almost impossible to hold a 
flame with it.  The tip of the punk will glow red. The sandy 
punk's red glow will easily light a gunpowder laced a fire cracker 
wick. But there is no way in the world that the sandy punk's 
hot red tip could light a candle wick, not a chance.  So I tried as 
best as I could to really burn that sandy punk.  I was working it 
up and down on a candle right there in front of Mary.  It was 
getting really hot and some of the sand had burnt off.  I had 
just got my first real flame.  And I was guarding it like a 
caveman with fire from a lightning strike, as I began carefully 
walking to the alter candles.
   
   Now Matt and Father Glenn were getting impatient.  The 
song had ended and father Glenn was already standing behind 
the alter with the bread, water and wine ready to begin the holy 
process.  But I as Igor had not yet properly lit the candles.  As I 
reached the alter candle to light it, the congregation had now 
awakened to the fact that something had gone wrong with the 
protocol. What was this alter boy doing? He should be at the side of the 
priests right now. But just as I reach the candle the flame was 
lost.  Nothing left but a red glowing ember about two inches 
long.  Desperately I tried to ignite the candle with it. But I 
failed. 
   
   Now totally frustrated, father Glenn began to say some 
quiet prayers. And the thoughtful organ player added on 
another hymn.   But instead of doing the easy thing and giving 
up on lighting the candles, I returned to the statue of Mary for 
another attempt. 
   
   Again I tried to light the punk, and gingerly walk across the 
alter to light the candles. But the flame went out again. Father 
Glenn's irritation at my dawdling was obvious to the entire 
congregation. I however took it as disappointment in the fact 
that the candles were not in fact lit,  not that I was causing a 
disturbance with an obsessive adherence to the letter of the 
mass procedure.  I was a true believer and thought, without lit 
candles the sole of Christ would never be able to be resurrected 
in the bread and wine.  If I didn't light the candles, the  hosts 
would not be transubstantiated, then all of the parishioners 
would not receive proper communion, and thus have a mortal 
sin. And if any of them died without confessing they could go 
strait to hell. I could not have that on my conscience, single 
handedly sending nearly a hundred people to hell, including 
members of my own family.   My mother  and grandmother in 
hell because I just gave up and did not light the candles.  Not 
on my watch. I would light the candles. I would save my family 
from the fiery pit of hell.
   
   As I re-lit the punk the third time the church was silent. The 
organist had stopped playing.  Father Glenn had stopped 
praying and had his arms folded in his long robes.  No doubt 
sneaking a drink,  from his flask, as I created such an 
interesting distraction.  The only thing you could hear was the 
sound of my squeaky rubber soled dress shoes and the 
nervous sounds from the congregation as they waited with 
bated breath for me to finally complete this simple task. I was 
trying to block out a muffled laugh that I knew to be my sisters' 
voice baffled by my mother's and grandmother's hands.  It cut 
through me.  But this was more important than 
embarrassment. This was about saving souls. The very work 
the Christ himself did.  I could take any amount of 
razzing.  Lump it on.  My reward comes in the next life. 
   
   As I reached the alter candle for a third time, it was 
extinguished again.  Many in the congregation sighed loudly 
with disappointment.  And I returned to the statue of Mary for 
a fourth time.  This was to much for father Glenn who 
returned to the script of the mass trying to regain the attention 
of parishioners.  But it didn't seem to work, the congregation 
had degenerated into quiet talking.  I think people had even 
begun to take bets.  And As I stood for the forth time in front 
of the statue of Mary.  My grandmother stood up in her pew 
and cried loudly,
   
    Oh mother Mary, forgive me. 
   
   She exited the pew with her pocket book in hand and 
walked up to me.  Standing beside me, she said another prayer 
to Mary and deposited 4 quarters into the votive candle 
offering box. 
   
    I am sorry Greg my dear.  This is my fault.  I know it. 
   
   With the flame now lit I walked over and lit the candles, 
with the mass still in progress.  I reached the alter candle and lit 
the first one easily.   Hallelujahs were shouted and there was 
some muted applause.  I took my place next to Matt.  His face 
was red with embarrassment for me.  He shook his head,
   
    Tough luck Greg, 
   
   I didn't feel that though. I was truly proud.  I had just saved 
the souls of the entire congregation
   
   
   
    








9 NAME REASSIGNMENT

  
It was now out in the open, my father was not returning. The 
idea came at first as a dull understanding.  The sort of dull half 
understanding you have when an adult informs you of 
something that you could not possibly understand.  For two 
years I had had no father, so to be told some fact about 
something that isn't around, had very little immediate effect. It 
is as if she told me that Leningrad is now called St. 
Petersburg.  Information about remote things like a Russian city 
or absent fathers, just pass right through a child's conscious 
thought, which is only concerned with food, TV and toys.
   
   Shock set in after Mom had now openly and in earnest 
started searching for a new husband. The late nights at 
grandma's house waiting for Mom to return, now had changed 
their character.  In the months before, my sister and I didn't 
even question what she was up to. We were innocent and 
comfortable.  But now after each night out at the bar or date, 
mom would brief us on the possible guys.  And while we were 
out shopping or running errands she would point to men and 
say, maybe you would like him for your daddy.
   
   Mom did have a group of girl friends that would come 
around the house after the husband project came out in the 
open.  This was fun. It was like being invited to a party. Other 
than friend's birthday parties some of the first I attended.  I 
thought my moms friends were beautiful. They all had long 
hair and wore skirts and high heels, so different from the way 
my grandmother dressed. They talked fast, smoked cigarettes 
and cussed. They let me taste their drinks. The bitter sweet taste 
of alcohol on a young pallet. Mixing with the perfume and 
smoke.  Sally had large breasts and a powerful laugh that 
caused her frame and everything on it to shake.  I loved to 
stand close to her.  I would do anything she asked me to do, 
just to be near her.  I could tell even at the  young age of ten 
that I was flirting.  I wasn't sure it was called that.  But I knew I 
was acting funny.  I even let her paint my toenails. 
   
   Grandpa and grandma were less happy with this new 
arrangement.  They saw less of us now.  And mom's friends 
had such a forbidding appeal. Hanging out with them was like 
being bad without getting in trouble. I felt free, happy and 
giddy.  It is an infectious feeling and I definitely caught 
something from those braless seventies divorcees.  But the 
feeling is also addictive. And there is only so much you can 
have you are a ten year old boy with his first sexual crush on 
his mothers friend.  At least sally wasn't a friends mother.
   
    Mickey's mom was hot. But she doesn't have the boobs.  
Carl said
   
    Yeah, but Ms Malena has boobs and she smells really 
pretty too.  I said speaking of Sally.
   
    Yes, she's got some great honkers,  Carl said.
   
    Honkers?  I said, questioningly.
   
    Honkers, boobs, you know, get it honkers.  Carl said while 
making a honking noise and squeezing me on the chest over 
my homemade dry weave polyester shirt.
   
    I think that honkers means a person's nose,  Billy said.
   
    Carl, you're thinking of hooters,  Mat said.
   
   Carl is unfazed by the correction.   Have you ever seen a 
girls boob?  Carl asked.
   
    Greg has some pretty good boobs on him,   Matt said
   
    Shut up. Matt.   I said, while punching him in the arm.
   
   I had seen my mother's boobs many times.  Since I was 
young my sister and I would bathe with her with no thought at 
all about shame.  She continued to walk around the house 
naked.  Not any sort of habitual thing like a nudist.  But the 
regular sort of natural nudity you would expect a mother to 
have around her children.
   
   Although I was slightly conflicted about admitting it I said, 
 I have seen my mom's boobs a bunch of times. 
   
    Dude what! That's gross! That's your mom.   Carl said.
   
    I'd like to see your mom's boobs.  They're almost as big as 
Ms. Malena's,  Matt added.
   
    How about you Carl? 
   
    Well, my sister's friends were having a sleep over at the 
house and they were playing around all night. They took off 
their pajamas and looked at each others boobs.  I think they 
were playing a game.  One of them took me into a closet and 
showed me her boobs and even let me touch it.
   
    What did it feel like?  I asked. Not wanting to admit to 
them or my self that I hand felt my mother's breast numerous 
times and still if questioned could describe it well.
   
    It felt like heaven, with a nippy titty. , Carl said motioning 
with his hands
   
    Wow. 
   
    Did you kiss it?   I asked.
   
    Kiss it? No,  I wish. She just took my hand and put it on 
it.  We were sitting in the closet so it was pretty dark.  But I 
kinda got a look at it cause the door was cracked open.  And 
when I was feeling around on it she was kinda squirming.  But 
she seemed kinda like she was proud of them or something. 
   
    You got to second base, man!  Matt said,   I definitely 
have to touch some boob soon. 
   
    Yeah, me too,  I said while unconsciously feeling myself 
up.
   
    Check it out, Greg's just got to second base with himself. 
   
    Hey Greg can you help a guy get to second base too? Just 
a little feel.   Matt said gesturing toward my little fat boy boobs.
   
    Yeah, give me a feel.  Carl added.
   
   Back with my mother's friends was so different from 
talking with the guys.  It was easy.  How I wished that Sally 
Malena would take me into the closet and proudly put my hand 
to her big chest.  I had to settle for sitting in her lap, 
momentarily that is before she told me to get off.  I guess I 
really settled for sitting next to her while she held my chubby 
foot in her hand and carefully painted each nail.  Her hot 
alcoholic breath mixed with perfume and smoke I breathed in 
deeply.  I wanted to capture everything about her. To hold her 
and be held. It was if I had  ten toes in heaven and this way 
stole away some lasting evidence with the shiny pink nail 
polish.
   But the new exciting life with my mother's friends and 
Mom's husband hunting and mani-pedi's, had it low points 
too.  Once a young pallet has tasted the sweet venality of a 
Strawberry Daiquiri or Tom Collins it was hard to settle for 
Grandma's powdered milk.  And my mother certainly did not 
take me out with her to the bars.  So my sister and I would 
return to our grandparent's house most nights.
    
   
   
   
   







10 CHAPTER NAME

   
Powdered milk best describes the mood I felt being relegated 
to my grandparent's house, as my mom prepared with her 
friends for a night on the town.  Grandma's powdered milk 
was the sad substitute for real milk. This life behind my 
grandmas wood paneled walls, pacing sadly over brown 
carpeting, collapsing on a yellow sofa to watch Saturday night 
television on a black and white TV, was a sad substitute for the 
real life my young soul had just glimpsed.  A world filled with 
drinking, smoking and long haired big boobed ladies. 
   
   Grandma would make powdered milk each day.  She would 
take the large box from the shelf. It had a picture  of a cow on 
the front and a little milk maid with a pail full of fresh 
milk.  The stuff was toxic. As she pored it out into the jar, a 
cloud of powder filled the air like weaponized anthrax.  Over 
years of powered milk making, she had developed her own 
little procedures for making it, completely ignoring the 
manufactures suggestions and directions.  She like to get the 
most out of the powder,  so she would boil a third of the water 
and make a super concentrated solution and  then add  in the 
rest of the cold water.  But this process had an unintended 
result that she completely ignored. It made the milk almost 
completely unpalatable.  The powdered milk curdled with the 
boiling water, leaving chunks in the final result.  My sister and  I 
would fight over which one would poor it over  our morning 
cereal first.  Because the first one to pour would most likely get 
the most chunks.  What's more Grandma would not mix this 
powdered milk in a pitcher.  She would reuse a Hellman's 
mayonnaise jar.  In the fridge, it would look like jars of 
mayonnaise, but it was really substitute milk.  The screw on lids 
to the jars had become rusted and every morning you had the 
risk of having rust tinged milk. It looked like a weak mixture of 
strawberry Quick.  Later when the lids rusted too badly even 
for her, she would close the jar with a square of waxed paper 
held tightly in place by an old beige rubber band.  
   
   Powdered milk was an abomination to the substance central 
to us mammals.  It was an abomination to the new life I was 
discovering .  
   
   On most nights at grandma's house, my sister and I took 
turns taking a bath.  When my sister would go in I would sit 
and talk to my grandpa.
   
    So what color was George Washington's white horse, 
Greg? 
   
    Brown, grandpa.  It's brown I know 'cause  we have a 
picture of it in our history book. 
   
    You should think about things, son. Now you remember 
Ben Brown don't you, son.  
   
    Yeah he saved you from that fire.  Right? 
   
    Yeah that donkey pulled me from the fire when I was just 
about your age.  
   
    That donkey was really smart, huh? 
   
    Well, he was smart, but kinda jealous too.  I think.  We got 
on really well. And after the fire, it was just me and him. My 
mother, father and brother's and sisters were all burned up. 
   
    Grandpa, that's terrible.  What did you do? 
   
    Well, at first I just stayed around our land and Ben Brown 
and I tried to carry on.  The neighbors would come around 
and help.  But alone with a donkey, on some tiny farm is no 
way for a kid to live. You can understand that can't you? 
   
    Yes, grandpa, I think I'd be lonely all by myself.  But you 
could do anything you want,  stay up late and watch TV. 
   
    Well, of course ,we didn't have any TV, nor radio neither. 
And I was living outside in a shack after the house burned 
down.  So I had to let go of the old life and move on to 
something new. Now, I was deep in Missouri, and at that time, 
I got word that my aunt was in the circus.  She was a trapeze 
artist. 
   
    She would fly on the swings? 
   
    Yes, as graceful as a blue jay and twice as fast.  She would 
swing form one to the other.  My mom had told me all about 
her. And the circus was coming through Jefferson City.  So me 
and Ben Brown set out for the circus.  We left everything we 
knew of our old life.   Well, most of it was taken by the fire 
anyway. 
   
    Were you scared? 
   
    Yes, a little. But I didn't let on.  I wanted to be strong for 
Ben Brown.  I could tell Ben Brown was really scared and we 
set out.  He had never been further than the small town, and 
his long ears started twitching like crazy as soon as we got past 
the general store.  I just petted Ben Brown on the head and 
said 'easy boy, everything's all right boy. Let's go to the circus 
boy.' You say it now,  Grandpa insisted.
   
    Easy boy, everything's all right boy.  Let's go to the circus 
boy,   I spoke carefully with a deep voice trying to put myself in 
grandpa's place.  I wish I had a donkey. I'd take care of him 
real good.  How long did it take to get to the circus? 
   
    Well, Jefferson City is in the middle of Missouri and it 
wasn't too far away.  But donkeys sure don't move fast if they 
move at all. And it hurt me to do it but some times I'd have to 
take a switch to old Ben Browns butt to get him moving. 
   
    Oh grandpa,  but he saved your life. 
   
    Sometimes you gotta give a donkey a whooping if it 
doesn't keep moving.  It's for his own good.  We didn't have a 
thing except the clothes on my back and some food that the 
neighbors had given me. You see the state wanted to put me in 
an orphanage like your grandma.  But I would have no part of 
it. And  I was ten years old.  Back when I was young, that  was 
as good a time as any to go out on your own. 
   
    So you made it to the circus. 
   
    Yes, we made it to Jefferson City about a week after the 
circus arrived. It was night, and the animals were tied up 
outside the tents.  They had this sign that said miniature 
horses.  But I could tell they were just shaved dogs. 
   
    Shaved dogs? 
   
    Things are not what they seem in the circus, Greg. The 
sign says one thing, but the truth of the thing is often very 
different, and a little sad. 
   
    So I pass these minute horses, and I guess they had taken 
the reigns out of their mouths for the night as they started 
barking like crazy when I passed.  There was a bunch of 
wooden caravans done up fancier than a department store 
Christmas tree.  Some of the signs said strong man, fat lady, 
Mr. stretch and bearded little girl.  But I was looking for Linda 
the flying squirrel. 
   
    Linda the flying squirrel?  Grandpa that's silly. 
   
    Linda was my mother's sister.  You see, my mother was 
the pretty one, so she got married. Linda was a little short and 
had spiky brown hair.  She kinda looked a little bit like a 
teenage boy.  In fact, she was just an inch or two taller than me 
and my hair was longer than hers, as I hadn't been cutting it 
since my dad died. 
    So Linda took me and Ben brown in.  I would help her 
train by holding the swings for her while she did her 
routine.  We shared just a little caravan at night. But in the day 
we could practice and hang out in the spacious tents. 
   
    How about Ben Brown? 
   
    Well, at first I'd just tie him up out side the caravan at night. 
And in the day I'd use him to collect trash and hall stuff about. 
But that all changed with Dirk Jensen. 
   
    Dirk Jensen? Who was Dirk Jensen, Grandpa? 
   
    Dirk Jensen ran this competing circus. And it was really 
popular for a new sensation called horse high diving. 
   
    Horse High Diving, Grandpa?  What's that 
   
    It's just what it sounds like.  They get this horse and they 
train him to climb up this steep ladder about three stories tall. 
He is standing up there on a ledge, while the crowd is going 
crazy. 
   
    What happens next? 
   
    Well, beneath that three story platform is a ten foot deep 
pool filled with water. 
   
    Then the horse jumps into the water, Grandpa? 
   
    Well, under the best of circumstances it does.  But that's 
got to be a pretty well trained horse. And Dirk Jensen was 
supposedly the best horse trainer around. 
   
    What if the horse doesn't jump? 
   
    If it takes too long the trainers on the ground just pull a 
rope and it pulls a pin out the platform. Then the horse goes 
tumbling into the water.  If the horse jumps on his own, he's 
less likely to get hurt, as he won't turn over on his back. If he is 
reluctant to go the trainers have to pull the pin and knock him 
off the platform, or all the audience will want their money 
back. The trouble is, about half the time you pull the pin, the 
horse dies in the fall. 
   
    That's awful. 
   
    Well, it's a cruel world, Greg, and sometimes you just gotta 
jump.  The reluctant horses had let the trainers decide their fate 
for them.  The scared horse is just sitting up on the platform 
one minute, and then the next, it's ass over tea kettle into the 
water.  Sometimes they'd break their leg or the neck.  Either 
way they'd shoot the injured ones while they were still in the 
pool. 
   
    Why is that, Grandpa? 
   
    You can't pull an injured horse out of a pool while it falling 
all about.  That's just not humane. 
   
    Oh Grandpa, that sounds awful. 
   
    It was pretty bad, especially behind the scenes.  After a full 
day of horse diving that water could be full of blood. But the 
good patrons don't see any of that.  They buy their tickets and 
are corralled into the spectators area. The horse jumps or is 
pushed and the crowd leaves happy, before they ever see any 
clean up.  
   
    Oh my god grandpa,  did Ben Brown start horse diving? 
   
    Well, not a first.  Ben Brown and I would help in the clean 
up process.  If a horse had been reluctant to jump and the pin 
was pulled ,dropping the horse into the water breaking its leg 
they'd shoot it, like I said.  After that they'd take a rope and tie 
it around the horse and tie the other end around Ben Brown, 
then I'd take my switch to Ben Brown's back side.   Smack 
smack, Grandpa gestured with his hand to my bottom.   Then 
strong ol' Ben Brown would pull that dead horse out of the 
water. 
   
    Sounds like an awful job, Grandpa. 
   
    Well, times back then were pretty tough, and at least we 
were pulling dead horses in the entertainment industry. It could 
have been much worse. We could have been in an orphanage 
like your grandma.  You see even though I lost most of my 
family, the rest of them stood up and helped, like Ben brown 
and my Aunt Linda. 
   
    That’s nice, grandpa. 
   
    It sure is and we would not be dragging dead horses our 
whole life.  Some days it's going to get better and some days 
it's going to get worse. 
   
    What do you mean, Grandpa? 
   
    Well, I ain't dragging dead horses any more. And I got this 
house and a job at a factory helping to make the latest war 
planes.  Things really got better for me. 
   
    How about Ben Brown, Grandpa? 
   
   Well, Ben Brown was getting old. And he had been pulling 
out dead horses for a whole year.  Then one day he up and 
hurts his leg.  Now when an old horse or donkey hurts its leg it 
usually gets shot.  
   
    Oh Grandpa, no?! Not Ben Brown? Not the donkey that 
saved your life! You didn't shoot Ben Brown, did you? 
   
    Now calm down Greg, you know everything has to 
die.  But that’s not the point. We made about 5 dollars a week 
dragging dead horses out of the pool and to the butcher.  And 
on top of that five dollars the butcher gave us a little horse 
meat too. So that was quite a good job. 
   
    Horse meat doesn't sound so good,  Grandpa. 
   
    They use to eat it during the depression all right, and they 
still eat it in France.  Some people probably took a bite of 
George Washington's white horse too, when he died, 
regardless of his color.  The worst part about the job was the 
flies in summertime. When its hot like that and you're dragging 
a big old dead horse, your gonna attract some flies.  Autumn is 
the best time of the year for dragging horses bar none. The dry 
leaves make the horse slide real nice over the gravel roads. It's 
just something about that autumn air. That it doesn't matter 
what the carcass is getting hung up on. It's like the whole way 
to the butcher was paved with a slick muddy puddle, which are 
ideal dead horse dragging conditions.
   
    I like autumn too, Grandpa. I like playing in the leaves. 
   
    So like I was saying, Ben Brown hurt his leg so his days of 
horse dragging were behind him. But me and Ben Brown got a 
lucky break. It seemed that Dirk Jensen the big wig guy that ran 
the competing circus came around our circus and started 
talking trash about our circus.  He was having some words with 
the strongman and Aunt Linda. Since Ben brown had hurt his 
leg he was just standing out in the field near the dung pile.
   
    Dung pile? 
   
    That's the place where we'd throw the horse crap and 
elephant poop.  It was a sort of no mans land but me and Ben 
Brown would do the dragging of the crap out there. So, as I 
was saying, Ben Brown is just hanging out there, eating what 
little grass leaves he can find. The horse high diving isn't going 
on, on account of the fact that we don't have Ben brown to 
drag out the injured horses. 
   
    You weren't making any money grandpa? 
   
    Not a cent and they were going to shoot Ben Brown on 
account of his bum leg. Then they were going to send me to 
the orphanage, on account of the fact that I was really only 
good at whipping my donkey to get some work done. 
   
    What did you do, Grandpa? 
   
    So here's the lucky break.  That Dirk Jensen he is plenty 
rich.  He wore fancy clothes, had a pretty wife and a girlfriend 
that was three times prettier than her.  He also had a taste for 
wagering. 
   
    Wagering is that betting? 
   
    Yes, betting. He would bet for fun.  But most of the time it 
seemed he was betting  for spite.  So like I was saying,  he is in 
this argument with the strong man, Linda and now the circus 
owner's got into it to. Well, dirk Jensen is going on about the 
horse high diving being his idea and accusing our circus of 
copying. 
   
    That's true isn't it, grandpa? You just told me that Dirk 
Jensen had the idea first. 
   
    Your right son,  but just because something is true is no 
good reason to pick sides in a fight.  True or false in an 
argument you gotta take the side of your family and friends, 
because most of the time son, they are going to be flat wrong. 
   
    So Dirk Jensen's insulting our horse diving rig, saying it 
ain't fit even for a donkey.  And then he goes and bets a stack 
of money that they could not even get a donkey to dive off 
there. 
  
   
   
   







11 BEN BROWN'S DIVE


 Well, the circus owner, the strong man and my Aunt Linda, 
knew that I could get Ben Brown to do most anything. So they 
tell me as long and I get Ben Brown to climb up that steep 
ladder, I am going to get a big cut of money.  Big enough so I 
don't have to go to the orphanage. 
   
    Grandpa, why did they say you only got to get him to 
climb up the ladder?  Doesn't Ben Brown have to jump too. 
   
    'Cause they know as long as he gets up there, they are 
going to pull the pin and drop him straight in the water. 
   
    But that'd kill Ben Brown, Grandpa! 
   
    Sure enough, It would have killed him like all the other 
reluctant horses we had dragged out. So they keep telling me to 
just get him up there and they'll pull the pin. Now I don't want 
Ben brown to die.  But I think the horse shooter was going to 
do him in the next week anyway because of his hurt leg. And, I 
sure would love having a little bit of money. What's more it 
would keep me out of the orphanage.  So I start walking  Ben 
Brown up the ladder.  I grab my switch and give him a few 
taps on the rear. 
   
    Was Ben Brown scared? 
   
    His ears were twitching a lot. And he was kinda making all 
kinds of noises 'cause it was hurting him to put weight on his 
leg.  But it wasn't like dragging a dead horse, so he was making 
it up the horse high dive ladder pretty well. 
     While were climbing everybody's cheering and a crowd 
has formed around.  Now they didn't sell any tickets for this 
jump on account it was just a spiteful wager by Dirk 
Jensen.  But my Aunt Linda starts going around and collecting 
some money from the onlookers.  And I just keep guiding Ben 
brown slowly up the ladder knowing that as soon as he got up 
to the top they were going to pull that pin.  And after that Ben 
Brown would probably tumble ass over teakettle to his death. 
   
    Oh Grandpa! How could you? 
   
    My chest was pounding, my heart felt like it was going to 
jump right out of my throat.  And I got an idea.  Now I was 
still pretty small and thin as a toothpick.  I thought If I got on 
top of Ben brown and got him moving pretty fast we could 
jump off the end of the dive before they got a chance to pull 
the pin.  But that fall could easily kill me just the same.  'Cause if 
we don't make it I'm in ten feet of water with Ben Brown on 
top of me.
   
    Oh, Grandpa, what did you do? 
   
    I plucked up my courage and hopped on top of ol' Ben 
Brown and brought that switch down the hardest I ever had 
on Ben Browns butt.  He plucked up and ran. And we darted 
fast as we could right off the end of the dive.  While we were 
falling I could here the crowd gasping. 
   
    What happened? 
   
    The next thing I knew, I was looking at something 
sparkling blue. I noticed my head hurt real bad.  I open my eyes 
and saw my  Aunt Linda's sparkling Blue leotard.  She was 
holding me in her arms, smiling as big as the world. 
   
    What about Ben Brown? 
   
    I looked over and saw that he had already managed to get 
himself out of the water.  He was just the same as he ever was, 
looking for something to eat near the dung heap. 
   
    Oh Grandpa, you saved his life. Just like he saved yours. 
   
    Greg, it is time for your bath,  Grandma said pulling me 
away from the table.
   
    Grandma did you hear? Grandpa saved Ben browns life, 
did you know that? 
   
    What have you been telling him Bud?  Careful what you say 
he's gullible like his mother.  Grandma said, pushing me 
toward the bathroom.
   
   It was during that bath that Grandma discovered I had pink 
toe nails.  She was shocked at first mistaking it for some kind 
of disease.  
    Greg what is that on your toes.  You gotta let those pigs 
out of their sneakers occasionally. You're gonna have to get 
them amputated if you get an infection.  Let me put some 
campho phenique on them after your bath.  Your dammed 
toes are going to fall off. 
   
   Campho-phenique was my grandmother's cure-all. It 
seemed she had purchased a lifetime supply sometime in the 
late forties.  In a time of modern medicine and modern 
packaging her Campho-phenique was a stand out, it came in 
old fashioned medicine bottles that looked more appropriate 
for a museum than a medicine chest.   My mother swears that 
Grandma forced her to eat a teaspoon of it for a persistent 
cough.  Most of my grandmother's uses were not the 
suggested uses of the product, and were even contraindicated 
for the particular complaint. And some uses were certainly 
lethal.  It wasn't until I was an adult that I learned that 
Campho-phenique is a treatment for cold sores.  
   
   So while I was in the bath trying my best to scrub off the 
incriminating pink toe nail polish. Grandma was out side 
preparing the old green bottles of herpes medicine and the 
cotton ball with which to apply it.  
   She was no doubt talking about it with my Grandpa.  I 
thought It would be so embarrassing if Grandpa found out I 
had been wearing toe nail polish. And how could I explain to 
him that I did it only to get close to the older woman that I had 
my first sexual crush on.  
   I was  scrubbing like crazy now along with pink toe nails I 
had bright red toes from all the forceful cleaning.   I thought 
about stalling even longer in the bath. But my skin was starting 
to prune and the water was getting too cold.   I finished up and 
dried off.  I was trying to think up some story as to why my 
toes had to be painted.  I tried praying to Mary.  I know that a 
boy having painted toes in not a sin. Even if it is frowned 
upon by all of masculine society.  But lying about it sure is a sin 
and I am pretty sure coveting Ms. Malena's boobs is a sin 
too.  So half way through my prayer to Mary I let it be. Best to 
take this one like a man.  A man with pink toe nails.
   
   So I walked proudly out of the bath room, bare foot, my 
little piggies living out loud in bright pink.  Grandma set me 
down at the kitchen table and began to inaccurately apply cold 
sore medicine to my pink pedicure.  She held my foot and 
looked at the toes real closely.  Then she slapped me upside the 
head.  I didn't so much as stir.  I could feel the slap tingle on 
my face. I straightened my hair and she gave me a half smile.
   
    Now you go put some socks over your feet and get into 
bed like yours sister.  No TV tonight.   Grandma said sternly.  
   
   Angela was tired and already asleep a book laying right next 
to her.  I got into bed and thought about stuff.  There were a 
lot of changes going on. I was now an alter boy.  I had been 
tipsy from alter wine.  I was interested in girls now, a whole 
new world of women, and most importantly to a young boy's 
interests, boobs.    My mom was now different.  She had new 
friends who were fun and pretty and were helping her to find a 
new husband.  It had been revealed that my father was not 
going to return.   But in the end that was just a small thing 
lacking, in comparison to all the new stuff in my life.  I felt 
good and I was happy. I could lay awake in bed and target my 
prayers more accurately now.  I could pray for my mom to find 
a husband. I could selfishly pray to get closer to Sally Malena 
and her boobs.  I could lay in bed and just feel the world 
turning around me.
   
   







12 NEW NAME


As the weeks of looking for a new husband wore on, after it 
was revealed that my father was not coming back, my mother 
started to clean house a bit.  Or more accurately she was 
rewriting history, much the way it was conducted  during the 
cold war.
   Mom went through the family pictures with a scalpel and a 
permanent marker.  The scalpel for cutting my fathers face out 
of photos were it was possible.  The marker for covering the 
face and body when it was not compositionally possible to 
cut.   We helped her line up the picture sitting in the middle of 
the living room floor.  Liberating pictures from underneath the 
clear sticky film of photo album pages.  Mom would cut and 
blot through the short history we had together. Since my father 
had been gone for many years these photos of our youth 
seemed somewhat alien.  The life seemed alien.  I could 
recognize my mother who had only changed the color of her 
hair and now dressed somewhat more trashy.  I could 
recognize my grandparents who over the few years had not 
changed in any perceptible way.  But when it came to me or my 
sister we seemed odd. I had no memory of the times when the 
pictures were taken.  And what's more I had no actual 
memories of my father, Kent Kreisman.  For example, in one 
photo he was holding me up to look into the monkey cage at 
the zoo.  
   
    You don't remember that, do you Greg?  Mom asked.
   
    No, not at all. 
   
    Well, you were three then.  That was a long time ago. 
   
    Tell me about it, Mom. 
   
    It was in the monkey house at the zoo. I tell you Greg it 
stunk like crazy.  Nothing but animal poop in that whole 
place.  You remember the zoo? 
   
    Yes, we went last year with school, remember Mom, you 
signed the note. Or maybe it was grandma? I love the monkey 
cages.  One of the monkeys threw some poop right near Sister 
Fullashitta.  It was so cool. 
   
    Yep, the monkeys were throwing poo that day too. I 
wanted to get you and your sister out of there I thought that 
smell would get stuck in your clothes, and would never come 
out. ,  Mom said as she worked on more photos. 
   
    Yuck! Monkey poo!  Angela said as she  flipped through 
some other album.
   
    But your father wanted to stay.  Frankly I think he is part 
monkey.  He wouldn't leave until we took this picture of him 
holding you up to the monkey like an offering. He thought you 
would make a good monkey child. 
   
    I'd love to be a monkey child, running around naked 
playing all day.  I said.
   
    Here, give me that picture, Greg.  Let's see how handsome 
you look.  You will still have this memory.  Mom said as she 
carefully cut out Kent's face.  See look here, it looks better 
now.  Do you want to color over you father's body or should 
I? 
   
    Oh you better do it mom,  I always color out of the lines, 
and I don’t want to ruin such a good picture. 
   
   In addition to the photo manipulation program that was 
started. There was also a project to  rid the house all things 
Jewish. Mom ransacked the house looking for anything even 
slightly  heeby , throwing it in the garbage.  It was our own a 
mini crystal night, the trash can full of Jewish rubbish 
and  floor littered with our Father's small disembodied faces.
   
     Our father's parents, Lou and Ester, had given us a 
menorah for Chanaka.  It was the first thing to go. It made a 
loud clunking sound as it went into the garbage
   
    And listen kids,  Mom said,  this piece of sacrilegious shit, 
I want it out of our house.  It’s the devils candle stick holder, 
you don’t want to hold the devils candle stick do you. 
   
    No mom,  the devil is bad,  we said.
   
    And so is this piece of junk.  They got it on sale too.  It 
isn't even silver. It's like pewter or some shit like that.
   
    Yeah, get rid of it Mom. It's bad and not worth a cent. 
   
    And while were at it.  Don't you ever go to a bakery down 
in U City.  They sell those bagels there.  Bagels are Jew bread. 
Bagels are never allowed in this house. You should be eating 
Italian bread if anything. And were not going to get any of 
those new frozen bagels that you see on TV.  That's just a plan 
by those Jews to get you to by stuff while you're watching 
those Jew shows on TV. They're just a bunch a hawkers like 
your big nosed Jew grandpa. 
   
   Moms ethnic house cleaning spared few things even loosely 
connected with the Jews.  Of course the Manischewitz wine, 
the knishes, blintzes and instant matzo ball soup I could 
understand those. But my poster of star wars was on the 
chopping block too, because of the influence of the Jewish 
media. She relented and let me keep it after pleading with her 
and finally convincing her that Darth Vader is actually a 
Catholic nun. Mom had even wanted to throw out the first half 
of the Bible.  You know the Jewish part.
   
   After every picture was sanitized and the house was cleared 
of ethnic material, she asked,  do you kids, remember your 
father's name? 
   
    Dad,  Angela said quickly .
   
    No, Angela, his real name.   Mom corrected.
   
    Yes, Mom I remember it's Kent. Kent Kreisman. It's my 
middle name too.  I said proudly.
   
   Well, from now on I don’t ever want to here that name.  So 
Greg you might as well forget about your middle name all 
together.  And we mention your father we will call him Fred.  
Fred, like Fred Flintstone.  
    You got it kids?  Mom asked.
   
    Yes, we got it 
   
    Tell me, then what is your father's name? 
   
    Fred. . ., like Fred Flintstone 
   
    Good job, you are brave little guys. , Mom said kneeling to 
the floor giving us a big hug.
   
    And now, kids,  we need to take care of the last part of the 
Jewishness.  When I meet a good man to be your father.  He'll 
be a good Christian man. Not that he needs to go to Church 
and all.   But  just that he is one of us, you know.  
   
    Yes, he'd be like us, Catholic 
   
    Well, that’s the problem guys.   He'd really be like me and 
my mom and dad but not like you guys .  Because you guys, 
you sound like you got jew names. You see Kreisman is a Jew 
name and as long as you use it you are one of them.  And you 
don’t want to be one of them do you.   
   
    No Mom, what can we do? 
   
    We have to change your name. 
   
    Are we going to take grandpa's name. I'd like that?  I said.
   
    No. I don't want you to take my Grandpa's  name just on 
account of the fact that I'm going to get me a Jew lawyer and 
sue Fred. 'Cause one Jew will go after  another sure as anything 
when they can smell some money.  And Fred's got some 
money now. Do you know what your father does.  Well, what 
he does other than starting families and leaving them.  
   Mom paused dramatically and said,  He's a Doctor . Yes, 
he's a doctor all right, now. But when you guys were just babies 
he was a medical student.  And a Jew medical student at that.  
Let me tell you, there ain't anyone cheaper than a Jew medical 
student.  I had to work and pay for everything. 
   
    What did you do, mom? 
   
   You don't remember little dearies,   she hugged us close to 
her face.   Fred's little cut out faces were spread all over the 
floor the tips of her fingers black from the magic marker which 
blotted out the rest of his form.   Well, I taught at the very 
school you go to.  And at night I did some cocktail 
waitressing. 
   
   Although my mother had a degree from university.  The 
same university where she met my father, she certainly did not 
speak as if she were an academic.  Her instincts about teaching 
were all emotional and she was more of a friend to the 
students than a teacher. I spent many years of my education 
trying to overcome the lessons my mother imparted to me 
concerning reading and writing.  I questioned her one time 
about how could I read a big book.  I thought that I would get 
lost keeping track of all the characters.  She told me that it 
wasn't important who the book was about or the names that 
they use. Her advice was just to try to remember some things 
that happen.  After that little pep talk my reading 
comprehension scores dropped significantly the next semester 
as I tried to ignore the names. (It was a story about two guys 
on a raft.  I can't remember the river or the cities they went 
to.  It had a happy ending.) Of course, if you don't keep track 
of names the actions can have little consequence. And my 
mother actually saw the world this way.  Things happen and 
she just tried to keep doing stuff.  It didn't matter to whom, or 
at whose expense.  She wasn't really keeping track.  
   As for endings, those did not matter either.  There is a 
nursery rhyme about a fuzzy bear.  Fuzzy wuzzy was a bear, 
fuzzy wuzzy had no hair.  The next line is supposed to be an 
interesting counter factual.  Namely, that fuzzy wuzzy wasn't 
fuzzy was he.  Ironically a bear who was named fuzzy was not, 
in fact, fuzzy.  However, as my mother taught us fuzzy wuzzy 
was just a nonsense rhyme. We would  all repeat together fuzzy 
wuzzy was a bear fuzzy wuzzy had no hair. And then spout out 
random gibberish that ended in uzzy,  uzy, wuzy, uzy, wuzy.  I 
did not learn the correct recitation myself  until university.    
   
    Like I was saying kids, the point is, I worked and worked 
for that man.  He was just a student,  and didn't bring in a 
dime.  I put him through medical school but now he is a rich 
doctor, and he's gone.  That lousy Jew  won't pay back a single 
cent. That is until another Jew claws after him for a small cut of 
our money.   
   
   I sort of sighed, feeling a little angry that my mom was so 
upset.  But I didn't dare say anything. When she would get like 
this you just had to leave her be and ride along.  But what she 
was telling us felt important.  We were doing important things 
that day.  It felt important like an amputation, an aching pain, 
that had to be cut. Our world on Edwards being created by 
fiat, history being changed.  I was beginning to get dizzy and a 
little nauseous.  The world was spinning.
   
    So you can't take Grandpa's name because it won't look 
good when we sue Fred. 
   
    Can we make up a new name? , I ask.
   
    No for legal reasons, like I was saying, I think we should 
keep your new name close.  We are just going to make it look 
German. So on paper you have just about the same except 
from now on you will spell you name with two 
n's.  Kreismann, so, the people that we meet from now on, like 
maybe your new daddy,  will think you two are just like us, not 
a dirty back stabbing lying Jew like you father. 
   
    Sure, Mom, that's not hard. I like writing n's , Angela said.
   
    And when you say your name, from now on, you'll say 
'kriss' 'mann'.  Remember kriss rhymes with kiss.   she said 
giving us a little peck on the cheek.   Then you just put a  
'mann' at the end. 'Kriss man.'  nice and Christian. 
   
    My mother begins to hug us too tightly. But we could feel 
that the life revisions were almost complete.  We were tired and 
still had to sweep up the faces from the floor and put the 
pictures back in the album. 
   
    Oh you two kids!  You are so beautiful!  Gregory and 
Angela krismann.  How did I ever make such beautiful children 
from your father's evil seed? 
   
   







13 CARL'S BOOBS


   St. Ambrose was a parochial school with an almost 
completely homogeneous student body.  It consisted of 
second and third generation Italians.   These families were 
either upwardly mobile or on their way to being regular 
American white trash.   Still they were not the judgmental type, 
and largely accepted my sister and I, Jewish names or not. But 
although they were not judgmental they struggled to 
understand our name change with quizzical dismay.  However 
the school was totally unwilling to accept the fact  that my 
parents were getting a divorce.
   
    Gregory Kreisman,  Sister Fullashitta said calling role.
   
    No Sister, that's Krissmann,  I said proudly.
   
    No, Greg it's Kreisman.  Sisters Fullashitta is right.  Matt 
corrected.
   
    Sorry Sister,  My mother told me that I am now Gregory 
Krissman.  Its very important cause she's suing my father. 
She's going to get lots of money. 
   
    Oh I see,  Sister Fullashitta said knowingly as she walked 
slowly toward me,  stand up son. What is your name? 
   
    Gregory Krissman, Sister 
   
   She reaches my desk and laid her hand on my head as she 
often did slapping me hard on my knuckles with her ruler. 
 Your name is Gregory Kreisman until you leave this class got 
it. 
   
   I pause and she slaps my knuckles again.
   
    Yes, Sister, Gregory Kreisman, I understand. 
   
    Now son, that name was giving to you in a union 
sanctioned by the lord during a holy sacrament. I don't think 
that you should change it.  What the lord has put together let 
no man tear asunder, you understand. 
   
    
   I sat down rubbing my knuckles until recess. Where I could 
commiserate with classmates.
   
   
    Tough luck with Sister Fullashitta, Greg.  Matt said.
   
    Yeah, thanks. 
   
    But you kinda bring it on yourself.  Why do you always 
have to upset her?  And what's the deal with the new name. 
That's just stupid.  Don't act like such a dork 'Oh I'm Greg I 
have a new name. 
   
    Yeah, none of us have a new name,  Mickey said.
   
    I know what you should change your name to.  Crisco,  
John said
   
    Why Crisco? 
   
    Cause it's fat in a can. You know for cooking but you're 
just fat, fat in the can.  John said slapping me on the Butt.
   
    Cut it out guys.  
   
    Did you hear about Carl's collection.  Matt said changing 
the subject.
   
    What collection,  John asked.
   
    A boob collection.   
   
    Wow! A boob collection.  Mickey said excitedly.  Hold on, 
what do you mean a boob collection? 
   
    He has been going through all of his brother's magazines 
some of them just for women and he has collected them in a 
big box. 
   
    Have you seen them?  I ask.   
   
    No.  But I heard that the process was going on for 
years.  Carl's older brother Rodney had started the collection 
years ago.  But now his brother is already in college. So when 
he left he gave Carl the collection.  
   
    Wow, real magazines with people's clothes off. 
   
    Yep, the real deal. He has some Playboys and Penthouse 
and one French one that  I don’t even know how to say. 
   
    Let's go see them. 
   
    Yeah, let's go see them. I got to look at some boobies 
boobies  Mickey said sticking his skinny crossed arms into his 
shirt and pretending his elbows are boobs.
   
    Hey, Greg you can get some of Sally Malena's boobs.  
Mickey says rubbing his  homemade rack on my chest.  Go on 
then, give em a little kiss why don't you.  I know you want to. 
   
    Yeah, Greg wants to kiss Sally Malena's boobs,  John said. 
 He's probably gonna eat them all up. 
   
   Just then Mickey takes his hands out of his shirt.   Gregory 
Crisco ate up all of Mrs Malena's boobs. 
   
    Cut it out you Mickey.  I said, and give him a punch in his 
skinny arm.  Anyway, one is meant to drink the boob.  Don't 
you know anything Mickey. 
   
     All right guys, I'll tell Carl and after school we can go meet 
in the play ground and walk Carl's home to  have a look,  Matt 
said with all the importance of an agent or a pimp.
   
   You can tell he was basking in the warm light of second 
hand porn.  When I was ten erotic images were hard to come 
by.  It wasn't like today's world of the Internet and access to 
any image imaginable. As children we never even saw a boob 
on TV. This was before the days of cable TV networks and 
filthy original programing. We didn't even have a video tape 
player.  Every moving picture I saw at home was completely 
innocent.  The real naughty stuff back then was largely 
magazine based. But if you didn't have an older brother or 
young Uncle you had almost no chance to see it.  That's why 
Carl was so lucky.  He and his twin sister Carol were the 
second youngest in a large family of 6.  His older brothers 
drove and had facial hair.  They rode motorcycles and did all 
kinds of crazy things around the neighborhood.  That made 
Carl cool in a way that no other boys in our class were. He had 
all the trickle down experience from those older brothers and 
access to vast amounts of knowledge about the real world, out 
side of the grade school classroom or after school TV.   And 
we were lucky enough to get to have a glimpse of the vast 
library of naughtiness and sex, in the box of dirty magazines.
   My other chances to see boobs in print were pretty limited 
but I had taken full advantage of what little access I had.  There 
was the national geographic collection in our house that dated 
back to when my mother and father had first married.  This 
glossy journal was my most accurate source for boobs in the 
house. Best of all because of its reputation the boobs were right 
there in the open on the bookshelf.  I had memorized the 
month, year, and page of the best boobs that national 
geographic had to offer, in the entire decade of the 
seventies.  The standard picture of boobs in National 
Geographic is that they are all of old African women with long 
saggy ones.  Boobs so not erotic it is only a sociologist that 
gets any stir from them.   This standard picture is in fact not a 
great representation of true catalogue of boobs.  There are 
boobs from almost every continent and age. Some of the best 
boob pictures are of south American tribes with olive skin and 
quite perky boobs.  There is even in the November 1974 issue 
an aerial shot of a nude beach on the banks of a river in 
Germany.  And with aid of a magnifying glass, one could 
survey at least 20 pair of European boobs.  The next best place 
to find boob was the bra adds in the Sears and Pennies 
catalogs that we would have on hand in the house.   My 
grandma called them wish books, not for the boobs of course, 
but for me that would be pretty appropriate.  Grandma would 
look through the catalogs and circle the things she would like 
to buy that year.  Grandma would have us circle toys we might 
like too. But when grandma wasn't looking I would turn from 
the back pages where the toys were and a take a look at the 
bras.  The models had such pretty faces and looked so matter 
of fact about wearing no shirts.  They didn't seem to be the 
least bit embarrassed.
   The final last resort erotic pictures when we were young was 
the ones we tried to draw ourselves.  I was not particularly 
talented at drawing them.  But there was an older kid a grade 
up named Mark and he could draw boobs so good you'd 
thought they were tracings. Then there was Mickey who would 
take a simple drawing of a person and cut a little hole where the 
butt would be then he would put his fingers behind the hole, 
and sure enough, it would look just like a real but crack.
   
   
   Back in class it was a difficult as ever to concentrate on 
some stupid lesson with the thought of all the dirty pictures to 
be seen later.  Not to mention it had already been a highly 
emotional day.  I had been slapped by a Nun.  I had Mickey's 
fake boobs rubbed on me. And what's worse I'd been 
humiliated in front of the entire class for changing my 
name.  All this emotion and it wasn't even noon.  But the 
young mind is resilient and curiosity is a great distraction from 
ones own life.
   
   After school we met in the parking lot outside the play 
ground.  Matt, Mickey, Carl and John. Matt and Carl were 
walking up front walking down the street mickey asked me 
about my mom. 
   
    So my mom tells me that your mom is looking to find a 
new husband.  Mickey said throwing a rock at passing truck. 
   
    Yeah, that what she says. She wants to get us some 
insurance,  I said trying not to let on that I had no clear idea  
what insurance was or how my mother going to bars with 
Mickey's mother would get me any.
   
    I guess I  need some of that insurance too. On account of 
my dad is  away too.  Mickey said, maybe the most serious 
thing he ever said.  My mom says that she needs her pipes 
cleaned too.  And they got plenty of people to do it down at 
the bar.  Well, that's what I hear her tell my dad when she's on 
the phone with him in purgatory. 
   
    Mickey, it's penitentiary.  Your dad's not in purgatory.  Mat 
said, interrupting and waiting  for us to catch up,   stop talking 
about boring stuff were going to see some boobs. 
   
   Carl leads us into his back yard. It's about three blocks from 
my house.  Carl's house was in a new development that was 
built in the sixties as a way to entice the new wealthy Italian 
immigrants. His family ran a successful pizza chain. They had a 
lot more than any one else in the neighborhood.  But wealth 
did not spoil Carl.
   
   We passed the built-in pool.  It had a cover over it. It was 
late September.  We walked  through the back entrance on the 
way  to his second floor room.  We stopped off at the kitchen. 
It was the biggest kitchen that any of us had ever seen.  The 
kitchen and dining room was as large as one floor of my 
house.   Carl's mom was home and she stopped us.
   
    Hey boys,  do you want some cokes. 
   
    Mickey and I got kind of nervous.  But Matt as always 
retained his composure.
   
    Yes, ma'am, thank you,  Mat said.
   
    Well, you are certainly a polite boy.  What do you say Greg 
and Mickey,  you want a coke too? 
   
         Yes, ma'am,  we said.
   
     How are your boys mother's doing?  Greg, I saw your 
mom the other day at the store.  She sure was dressed 
pretty.  And that blond hair it sure suits her. You be sure to tell 
her for me. 
   
    Yes ma'am 
   
    And Mickey, say hello to your mother.  I think I saw her 
Sunday morning when I was on my way to six O'clock 
mass.  She was sure dressed fancy for church. And come to 
think of it she was walking the opposite way to church.
    Well, anyway here are your cokes. 
   
    Thanks ma'am. 
   
    Come on guys lets go to my room,  Carl said impatiently.
   
    Have fun boys  Carl's mom said as we hurried out of the 
kitchen.
    
   As we were walking up the stairs to Carl's room I kinda 
started feeling bad about looking at boobs right after talking to 
a mother about mothers.  It just didn't seem right somehow. I 
mean, come on she had just given us cokes, and now we were 
going to look at naked girls. However, curiosity had got the 
better of me when we entered Carl's room.
   
    So Carl where are they  Matt Said
   
    Under the bed,  Carl said as he reached down to get them. 
 I have to keep them hidden. 
   
   Carl pulled out a small cigar box while opening it proudly 
presented it to Matt.
   
    What the heck is this Carl?  Cigars? 
   
    No, it’s the pictures,  Carl said proudly.
   
    Carl you said the pictures were from magazines this is way 
too small for magazines. 
   
    Just open it Matt,  Mickey said.   I want to see some 
boobies.   
   
    Quiet Mickey, we don’t want Carl's  mother coming up 
here.  I said nervously.
   
    Wait till you see them,  Carl said beaming with pride.   I 
stayed up late doing it all night. 
   
   Mat opens the cigar box and a small wave of disembodied 
boobs fall onto the floor,  like a small pornographic snow fall, 
no two tits were the same.
   
    Carl! What the fuck?!  Matt said angrily.   What did you 
do? 
   
    I cut out the best bits,  Carl said still beaming over his 
handy work.  He got down on his hands and knees picking the 
circular disembodied breasts.   There are other naughty bits at 
the bottom too. You know the ones with hair. 
   
   Matt angrily dumps the contents of the cigar box on the 
floor.   Carl I can't believe you did that.  You mean you cut up 
all your brother's magazines. 
   
    Well, so far I got through little more than half.  I am going 
to finish the rest up. But my hand got sore from using the 
scissors all night.  Carl said.
   
   Mickey, Carl and I stayed on the floor sorting through 
hundreds of circular scraps of paper.  Although Matt was 
obviously totally disappointed, we three were in heaven.  The 
breasts were like gumdrops.  Handfuls of them would paint an 
abstract topography of young boys misplaced lust.  Matt could 
not appreciate the innocent boobs for boobs sake.  He needed 
the whole picture the woman, the face even her likes and pet 
peeves.  But we didn't mind three mammary misers, in the fort 
Knox of tits. We played.  In the end Carl reached far back in 
his closet and pulled out a stack of un-cut playboys and Matt 
sat there reading jokes we couldn't understand, as we lined up 
various breasts by size shape and nipple size.  Every once in a 
while Matt would get our attention and show us the centerfold 
of the model whose biography he had just read to us.   All the 
disembodied breasts do however mess with you perception. 
That night I even dreamt the moon and sun were breasts and 
the stars in the sky.  And I nearly had a fit passing cantaloupes 
stacked the produce section of the grocery store, lingering far 
to long with my chubby little hand on the melon rind.
   


The first few months of our family's new life was going pretty 
well.  My mothers search for a new husband and father for her 
children coincided with awakening of an interest in 
girls.  Mother's friends were exciting fully operational models 
of women, something that school girls could not quite 
approach.  And I was curious about almost every aspect of 
their life. Perhaps I was beginning to learn what Matt already 
knew.  That it is the whole package that makes a woman 
exciting,  not just some disembodied boob. What they had for 
breakfast. How they hold their cigarette to their lips as they 
pour themselves another Tom Collins.  The way they fix their 
bra strap or burn their unclothed thighs on a sun-warmed vinyl 
seat on a hot summers day.  Spending all the time with my 
mothers friends gave me a bit more confidence when it came 
to dealing with the school girls, and classmates.  But school 
girls seemed so much less exciting.  For example, I knew Rosy 
liked flowers. She would write poems about them ever day. 
And Marianne liked horses. She would never have a horse. But 
my mother's friend Sally Malena liked dancing to disco music 
in high heeled shoes and a tube top. That is very hard for any 
schoolgirl to beat.
   
   There were very few social functions out side of school that 
involved boys and girls. The only one was roller skating.  My 
three male role models were John Travolta in 'Saturday Night 
Fever', Leather jacket bound Fonzie from 'Happy Days', and 
corduroy jacket with leather patches Carl Sagan.
   
   The only other social function for boys was the boy 
scouts.  Our boy scout troop only had 6 people in it. They were 
all class mates of mine. We had Carl, Matt, Mickey and I were 
all in it together.  None of fathers of  the six boys in the scout 
troop acted as troop leaders.  Mickey's dad was detained, My 
was gone.  And the rest were either too tired from their work, 
or, they were already at the bar.  So the school enlisted 
whomever was interested.  
   
   Our scout troop was totally undisciplined.  From time to 
time we had different guest troop leaders, usually someone's 
visiting uncle or the live-in church janitor.  We would meet in 
the church basement and sit on folding chairs holding our 
scout hand book and wearing a blue neckerchief.  None of our 
troop members had ever earned a merit badge as there was no 
week to week continuity of administration.  We would usually 
sit in the church basement for an hour leafing through our 
scout book, talking over things we might do.  One night the 
janitor supervised we really did nothing at all. Sometimes when 
he was cleaning upstairs, we would rummage through the old 
cloths that parishioners would drop off for charity.  Almost 
every church basement has a stage as did ours. And most 
under supervised scout nights we would take turns prancing 
over the stage and trying to make the other kids laugh.  Skinny 
armed Mickey could wrap his arms around himself and with 
his back toward us mimed as if he was in a long sensual kiss 
with another person.  Matt could belch a whole Hail Marry. I 
usually resorted to crazy dancing punctuated with armpit farts.
   
   The few real supervised boy scout meetings were really 
boring. They started when a new guy moved in to the 
neighborhood who took an interest in the neighborhood boys. 
The school and church were happy to have him as a volunteer 
as this freed up the janitor to clean more thoroughly.  So the 
seven of us plus the new scout leader were meeting regularly, 
and with the goal of attending a Boy scout  function camp-out 
in the next month.   There was a lot for us to learn.  We had 
never gone though the scout hand book in any detail. None of 
us had memorized any of the scout mottoes or sayings.  We 
dressed inappropriately, wearing just our street clothes and a 
neckerchief. We could not light a fire, tie a knot or pitch a 
tent.  We were hopeless. But Mr Boiluve was going to give us a 
crash course and make us prepared to camp along side even 
the most conscientious Boy Scouts.
   
   We had been working pretty hard.  I had even tied some 
knots at home.  My grandma sewed me a special pair of khaki 
boy scout shorts with an elastic waste and double wide butt. 
Even Mickey, who was by far the least serious of us, had 
memorized the boy scout code.  He repeated it with great pride 
on the play ground during recess. These preparations that were 
transforming our scout troop even caught the notice of Sister 
Fullashitta who asked Matt, Carl, Mickey and I to give a 
presentation about the boy scouts for the rest of class.
   
   Mr. Boiluve took all the attention in stride. Out side of boy 
scouts it seemed he lead a pretty solitary life.  He had rented a 
studio apartment over looking the school yard. We would 
sometimes see him watching us on the play ground during 
recess.  We wondered if he could possibly hear Mickey's 
perfect recitation of the boy scout code.  Matt thought it was 
impossible. But he would just stand at the window watching 
us.  All the parents thought it was great.
   
   A week before the big camping trip we were encouraged by 
Mr Boiluve not to wear our boy scout uniforms to the 
meeting.  He said we should not get them dirty a week before 
going on our big trip.  It was a really warm Wednesday night 
when we arrived.  I was wearing my favorite t-shirt with Farah 
Faucet in a bikini, and blue jean cut-offs.  I was sweating like 
mad whenever skin met skin, especially the pits and the 
crotch.  We sat down on folding chairs before the stage.
   
   Mr Boiluve was sitting indian style on the stage and said
   
    Congratulations boys, you have all been working very 
hard.   
   
   We were all happy and replied very politely as we had been 
trained.  Thank you sir. 
   
     So tonight's meeting is going to be really easy. Because it's 
mostly just going to be a pizza party,  four large pepperoni and 
sausage pizzas and some cokes. 
   
    Thank you, sir,  we replied.
   
    But first we just have to take care of one minor thing. It 
turns out that you have to have a doctor look at you if you 
want to go to camp. Do any of you have a doctors note? 
   
    No, sir,  we replied.
   
    I didn't hear anything about a doctor's note,  Matt said.
   
    Well, don’t  worry because my friend Dr. Dan will be right 
in the back room and he will check you all out. 
   
    What is he looking for?  Mickey asked nervously.
   
    Well, the boy scouts are mostly concerned that you don't 
have hernias,  Mr. Boiluve said.
   
    Hyenas. That's like a dog or something?  Mickey said.  I 
know Bobby has a dog, so Bobby cant go. 
   
    Well, I sometimes get a charlie horse, it's not a dog but it 
hurts pretty bad,  I said.
   
    No, boys, a hernia is when there is something wrong with 
your private parts.  So we just want to check and see if you are 
OK before you go on the trip. 
   
    Will it hurt? 
   
    Not at all. Dr. Dan has a real soft touch. So you guys can 
start on the pizza and cokes and Dr. Dan and I will be in the 
back room.  
   Bobby since you do have a dog at home why don't we 
check you out first. 
   
    What's he going to do?  Bobby asks nervously.
   
    Well, you'll just go  in the room and pull your pants 
down.  And doctor Dan will do the rest. 
   
   We all seemed to be passing our exams with flying colors. 
Not a single hernia amongst us.  We were all so happy with the 
pizza party we didn't mind the inconvenience of a little exam. I 
sat on the church basement stage eating pizza until my 
turn.  The exams were not taking too long.  I had only eaten 
about 5 pieces of pizza but I drank about a liter of coke and 
had an urgent need to use the toilet.  I was a little bit worried 
about holding too much in my bladder 
   
    Do you think if I have to pee the doctor will think I have a 
hernia.  I asked Matt.
   
    Greg, it looks like you might have a hernia from wearing 
those shorts,  your packed in there like a sausage. 
   
   It was true the jeans were not husky size they were my 
grandfathers old slim jeans that grandma cut-off just a hair 
lower than the zipper.  These were adult sized pants for a rather 
small man squeezed over the wide butt of a ten year old boy.  I 
was still much shorter than my grandpa but grandma had cut 
them so short because summer was coming, and summer in St. 
Louis is hot and humid.  My thighs bubbled out from the 
shorts. My inner thighs were red from chafing even after the 
short walk from the house.  But I was proud of my 
shorts.  Firstly, they were once my grandpa's and, secondly, 
they were not made especially for fat kids.  Sure they were a 
grown man's hand-me-down jeans cut to ridiculous 
proportions but they did not say husky on them.  They were 
normal.
   
     Yeah, Greg's thing is like open up the barn door, its 
crowded in here,  Mickey said, making fun of my tight pants.
   
    Shut up guys,   I said.    But aren't you guys worried that 
they got to check our things. 
   
    Na, its nothing Bobby says. I was only in there for a few 
minutes.  You just pull down your pants and he makes you 
turn your head and cough while he touches your balls. 
   
    He touches your balls! 
   
    Yeah, it's no big deal then he takes out his portable x-ray 
machine and your done. 
   
    Portable x-ray machine.  No way? 
   
    Yeah it looks a lot like a camera but has in big letters x-
ray. 
   
    Cool. 
   
    Dr. Dan can see inside our wieners.  Mickey said.
   
    I bet it's going to show about ten pieces of pizza and a 
bottle of coke are in Greg's,  Matt said
   
    Cut it out guys. But really,  I should go pee.   I am totally 
going to fail this test. 
   
    That's right hernia boy.  You'll probably kill Dr Dan with 
the smell of your sweaty crotch.  Mickey said
   
    That's it I'm going,  I said walking toward the door.   I 
gotta pee. You guys are mean. 
   
    No, Greg we're just joking around.  Hey look Matt's up 
next. 
   
    Mr Boiluve leads Paul out of the back room.  Paul is still 
doing up his pants buckling his belt.  Mr Boiluve leads Matt 
from behind by the shoulders and leads him into the back 
room. 
   I head to the bathroom in the rear of the church 
basement.  It was right up the stairs leading to the church.  I 
went in the bath room and started to relieve myself.  And I was 
getting pretty nervous about the full frontal exam I was about 
to have.  I thought about going upstairs to light a candle to the 
virgin Mary for help.  I had two quarters in my pocket and one 
quarter would be more than enough for a small prayer for 
passing a hernia test.  I mean what more could I do.  While I 
may have made a poor choice of pants for a ball exam.  I was 
wearing my scapula so in case the test went horribly wrong and 
I died in the middle of it my soul would escape the fires of 
hell.  But I needed a little intercession from Mary even after 
relieving my self.   Those pants were really tight. 
   
   So I headed up the stairs to the first floor, and entered the 
church.  The janitor was napping in one of the pews in the 
back and his snoring could be heard quite easily baffling against 
the marble walls.   The stain glass windows which during the 
day were bright and colorful were now dark and muted.  The 
church was half lit and the light from the candle offerings 
danced on the statues and walls. I tried to walk quietly along the 
marble floor but my sneakers are squeaking with each chubby 
footfall. And my the sound of my thighs rubbing together is 
rivaling the echo of the janitor's snoring.   I kneel down before 
Mary looking up at her beautiful face staring down at me. Her 
furrowed robes and wide arms are familiar and inviting.   It was 
comforting at some level I didn't fully understand.  I could 
stare at the statue for hours.   It's funny that I didn't feel so 
much like praying. I got the feeling kinda like when I was 
around Ms. Malena in a tube top or looking at the bits that Carl 
cut out of the magazine.  
   
   Sitting there loosing myself in thought in front of the 
mother Mary, I break my concentration and with some 
difficulty. And with my chubby hand released one quarter from 
the tight jeans pocket pulling the thin white pocket material out 
in the process.  I put the quarter in the box and reach for the 
punks.  I light the punk and was about to light an offering and 
make a prayer when I feel a pair of large hands on my 
shoulders. 
   Stunned I drop the punk to the marble floor before lighting 
the candle.
   
    Now, Greg you shouldn't play with fire,  Mr. Boiluve said, 
taking one hand off my back to play with his bushy mustache.  
Dr. Dan is waiting downstairs for you.  He's got Mickey in 
there now so you're next.  
   
    Yes sir.  Is there more pizza? 
   
    Heck yeah Greg, eat as much as you want well even order 
more.  But if you don't let Dr. Dan take a look at you, you 
won't be able to go on the boy scout camp.
   
    Yes sir.  I'll go, I was just kinda scared?
   
    Nothing to be scared about. 
   
   Mr. Boiluve led me down the stairs and back into the 
church basement. As Mr. Boiluve was leading me into the back 
room with Doctor Dan. 
   
    Saying you prayers Greg.  Matt asked.
   
    Yeah, he is praying he's got some balls stuffed in those 
tight shorts.  Mickey joked.
   
    Quiet boys,  Mr. Boiluve said defending me.  If I know 
anything, it's that little boys all got the same plumbing. 
   
    Yeah, but I bet his is clogged with pizza.  Mickey added.
   
    Shut up guys. 
   
   We walked in the room and I dropped my pants. I just 
closed my eyes hoping I didn't have any secret hernias or there 
wasn't some strange distortion from eating too much, like the 
guys were joking.
   
   I felt Dr. Dan's cold hands.  He was wearing a white lab 
coat and a long stethoscope which he did not seem to need.  I 
could barely see his face as he is wearing a round mirrored 
head band to take a close look at my stuff. 
   
   Mr Boiluve just watched from the chair.  I thought about 
the fact that I had not lit my offering candle and said a prayer. 
But I had already payed my 25 cents.  I started to think how 
awkward it would be to try and light it later with out putting in a 
quarter.  They might think I am stealing.  I was making myself 
nervous with the the thought that I might be interpreted and 
stealing from the church when Dr. Dan took his hands away 
from my crotch and said.
   
    Initially, Greg, every thing looks OK.  but I will need to 
take and x-ray. 
   
    Will it hurt? Is it dangerous? 
   
    No, but you better close your eyes really tight just in case. 
   
    I squinted my eyes real tight. But in the tricky way where 
you can still kind of see through your eyelashes. I watched Dr. 
Dan as he took out his portable x ray machine. 
   
   It looked like a camera. The kind they have at the zoo where 
you can get your picture taken and take it away right there.  A 
Polaroid camera.  But this camera had x ray written right were 
Polaroid was. 
   
    Now make sure your eyes are closed and you better hold 
your breath too. 
   
   I held my breath and started to count one Mississippi two 
Mississippi three. Suddenly there was a bright flash and the 
sound of motorized wheels churning out a picture, just like a 
Polaroid. I opened my eyes.
   
    OK, Greg, you're done. I just have to read the x ray. You 
can pull up your pants Greg. 
   
    Can I see it, doctor Dan?  I ask
   
    Do you know how to read an X-ray, Greg? 
   
     No but I have seen them on TV. And my father is a 
doctor. 
   
    Your Father is a doctor?  Dr. Dan said nervously.    Mr. 
Boiluve you didn't say any of these boy's parents were medical 
professionals. 
   
    Greg you told me you father was gone?  Mr. Boiluve 
asked.
   
    Yeah he's not here.  
   
    So you can't ask him about the x ray machine?  Dr. Dan 
again nervously asked.
   
    Please let me see it, Dr Dan.  I pleaded.
   
    Well son, I don't think its good for people to see inside 
themselves. 
   
    Ok, I guess your right but still I wish I had an x ray 
machine. 
   
   I joined the rest of the guys back around the pizza. We ate 
and drank coke for about forty five minutes and then went 
home.
   
   The next Saturday morning all the boy scouts met at the 
church steps at 6 am ready to leave for boy scout camp.  We 
were waiting until eight o clock when Carl's mother came by 
and said it looks like we weren't going.   Mr Boiluve had 
disappeared. After Mr. Boiluve missed the meeting at the 
church steps. Concerned parents had checked at his apartment 
overlooking the school yard.  They called the building 
superintendent who opened the door only to find all of Mr. 
Boiluve's personal items had been removed.  All that remained 
was just the modest furniture of the finished apartment.  The 
building superintendent said it looked cleaner than before Mr. 
Boiluve moved in.
   
   We were all crushed that our hard work memorizing the 
scout motto and other details scouting would now not find a 
forum for expression. But most of all we were disappointed 
that we would not go camping.  I mean we were ready, x-rays 
and doctors orders, let us camp.
   
   As a makeshift consolation several father's were pulled from 
their bar stools to supervise a camp out in the small city park 
two blocks from the church.  The park named Bara park after a 
local kid who made it to big league baseball. It was a small park 
with about 15 trees a swing set and jungle gym and behind it a 
combined baseball and soccer field.  From the center of the 
park at night you could easily make out shapes of people 
through the windows of the residences, apartments and 
businesses that faced the park.    That night, the night that we 
would have been deep in the woods in the safe hands of Mr. 
Boiluve and Dr. Dan, we were instead telling stories by street 
light and roasting marshmallows over the park's barbecue grill. 
We were having a good time Mickey, Matt, Carl and I, 
especially.  Mickey's mom even stopped by with Mickey's uncle 
Rocco.  We could see them walking arm in arm as they left the 
bar across the street from the park.  Rocco was one of the guys 
you'd see around the neighborhood. He had a big truck and 
was always moving stuff off the back of it.  Mickey told us he 
and no idea that Rocco was related to them until his dad went 
away, but after that uncle Rocco was around all time, helping 
Mickey's mom with things about three times a week. Rocco 
was a big guy  who had a big crooked nose and messed up 
ear.  He had taught Mickey some boxing moves. Mickey said 
he's pretty cool and all that, but after he comes over the house 
smells like garlic, Aquavelva, and smoke.
   
    So,boys how is  the camping?  Mickey's mom asked, from 
under Rocco's muscle ripped  arm.  Her curly bond hair 
hanging past her shoulders and the straps of her halter top. 
   
    Not bad Mrs Mickey's Mom,  I said
   
    I know you guys worked so hard.  Mickey about drove me 
crazy reciting that boy scout motto over and over.  And he 
even told me about the doctor's check up.  Did you guys tell 
your folks that you saw a Doctor?
   
   We honestly hadn't. After the pizza party we didn't really 
think it was remarkable. Anyway, grandma and grandpa didn't 
know much about x ray machines of any high tech stuff they 
still had a black and white TV.  And they used  one of those 
old time  can-openers without moving parts.
   
    Yeah, boys sorry to hear about you troop Sergeant,  Rocco 
says still with his arm around Mickey's mom.
   
    Scout leader. 
   
    Yeah, scout leader anyways, some people ain't got no 
courtesy.  They shouldn't treat hard working kids that 
way.  Especially if they got nice looking mother's like this. 
   
    Oh, Rocco. 
   
    Next time you's kids wants to go camping we got some 
open space out by the airport.  That would be real good.  You 
could light some fires.  You just can't dig around too much. 
   
    Wow! Mom can we camp out by the airport!  Mickey 
asked.
   
    Well, have to see. 
   
    I got a feeling,  Rocco said,  that that scout leader of yours 
went camping without you, and I bet  he ain't coming back. 

   
   







Summer in St. Louis is hot, with humidity always around eighty 
percent.   And when the sun does shine clearly through the 
haze it would heat up the asphalt of the Edwards street and our 
alley and bake almost instantly any earthworms that did not 
make it across during the muggy night.   The second floor 
apartment were we lived with my mother had a flat tar 
roof.  Those four rooms would heat up like a sauna.   We had 
one window unit air-conditioner that we would leave on full 
blast.  It was in my mother's room and on the occasional 
nights that she stayed in from her husband search, we would 
all sleep to the comforting sound of the fan and compressor.
   
   Grandma and Grandpa had an old window unit  air 
conditioner, on the first floor too.  They had it in their living 
room. And during most of the hottest parts of any summer 
day we would lay around on her couch, only stirring to eat.
   
   Now summer is pretty bad for a normal kid. But it is 
particularly bad for the fat ones.  The most obvious draw back 
is aesthetics. Now fat kids were seldom fashionable.  Before 
the days of baggy oversize rapper pants and hoodies, fat kids 
were squeezed into larger sized slim cut pants.  Off the shelf 
Husky pants may fit in the waist but are often too narrow in 
the thighs  so my grandmother would have the daunting task 
of altering when she could.  But summer cloths she would try 
and make on her own, from hand me downs and fabric 
samples.
   
   Still the sweat would play a large part. Now everyone  knows 
that a white cotton t-shirt is about the coolest thing you can 
wear in the summer.  But that same white cotton t-shirt over 
the frame of a sweaty fat kid is transformed into a form fitting 
see through skin tight vellum, under which the pink boyish skin 
is visible.   While the hot St. Louis days were baking earth 
worms they were also transforming my shirts into sweaty 
transparent film and making me an unwilling exhibitionist.
   
   Grandma was often embarrassed by this.  She would talk 
with her neighborhood friends and try and come up with 
creative and cheep solutions to covering my body.  
   Grandmas friends were quite critical of me as a fat kid. They 
saw my weight as a result of a lack of self control.  
   
    No, Greg!  Get you face out of the refrigerator, I just let 
out the pants and we don't have any material to expand them 
any more.  
   
    But, Grandma I'm hungry. 
   
    You're not hungry you're just bored, go take a walk around 
the block. 
   
    It's too hot. And, I only got one shirt left to wear and it's 
for later. 
   
    Greg, my friends have been helping me with that.  They 
said they saw you yesterday walking with Mickey. 
   
    Yes? 
   
    My friends said that you walk kinda funny. 
   
    I don't walk funny grandma. 
   
    Yes, you do. I told them that you're not retarded or 
nothin'.  I told them you walk so funny, only on account of 
you're so fat. 
   
    Thanks grandma. 
   
    But they told me about this new kind of material called 
Stretch and Sew. 
   
    Grandma, the stretch part sounds really good. 
   
   During the muggy St. Louis summers I would put a great 
deal of stress on a pair of cut-off jeans, even if they were husky 
to begin with. The real problem was flexibility and give.  One 
could go ahead and dress a fat kid in over sized pants.  But if 
he is lazy and sedentary and prone to snacking he is likely to 
grow to fit what ever size pants you put him in.  That is the 
problem with corduroy or denim as pants they are often 
unforgiving and restrict movement of the chubby wearer.
   
    Grandma, I don't want to go for a walk my pants are too 
tight.   
   
    Put on your shorts. 
   
    But then my legs rub together. I rather just lay here next to 
the fan. 
   
    Get out there boy and move around. On account of if you 
stay in all the time doing nothing but looking in the refrigerator 
you're gonna get so fat were going to have to roll you out, 
naked. 
   
   Grandma understood these competing  processes that lead 
to my obesity and tried to offset them in a new manner of 
clothing me.
   
   
   Stretch and sew is a pattern company that was founded in 
the 60s by a woman Ann Person.  It became somewhat 
popular in the grandmother circles as a method of covering 
their grandchildren in the most embarrassing clothing 
possible.  Stretch and sew employed the technique of stretching 
some fairly giving fabric composed of man made fibers, and 
sewing it with a long straight stitch.
   
   These patterns included  t-shirt and shorts designs that had 
simple stripped down look of de-humanizing institutional garb.  
Polyester uniforms for children of a brave new, unfashionable 
world.  
   
   Grandma had found these patterns and it had occurred to 
her that she might be able to offset the spiral of increasing my 
jeans pants size only to have me fill them out, because the 
material itself was restricting my movement.
   
   She looked through stacks of patterns.  She was taken in by 
the illustrations of chubby kids playing freely in garments made 
of stretchy material.  Some children stood with there arms 
akimbo like a young superman about to take over the play 
ground.  She wanted that for me.  Home made clothes that 
would encourage me to get out and be in the world.  She 
wanted to dress me for the thin outgoing athletic boy she 
wanted not the overeating couch potato she had.
   
   So the process began.  From July, I would put away all 
cutoffs jeans and hand-me down cotton pants and t-
shirts.  She would head to toe clothe me in tailor made artificial 
hide that would allow me to move about freely like other 
children in the summer.  Not being held back by sweat soaked 
cotton shirts and popping waist buttons.
   
    Now, Greg you gotta think about these clothes like a 
prescription,  Grandma said 
   
    A prescription? 
   
    Yes, you think of them like something the doctor gives you 
to take away the pain and get healthy. 
   
    What do you mean? 
   
    Well, look at this now,  Grandma stood me up, pulling up 
my shirt, revealing a swollen boyish belly that hung over the 
tight waist of my blue jean cut-offs.  See this here, is why you're 
walking so funny. 'Cause you're so fat you can't  pull up these 
pants to your waist. 
   
    And what a waist it is.  Grandpa chimed in.
   
    Cut it out, Bud. 
    See Greg, this waist band is cutting right into you and its 
gonna hurt your organs. 
   
    My organs? 
   
    Yes, your insides.  Grandma said as she looked more 
closely at my clothes,  and just look and that crouch. 
   
    Crouch, Grandma? 
   
    Where you legs meet at your naughty bits, there,  She said 
as she pointed it out.
   
   Grandma, and about every other person I knew growing 
up, referred to the crotch of the pants as the crouch.  It seems 
they were searching for an ameliorating word in an attempt to 
offset the more provocative meanings of crotch.  I always 
thought it had something to do with the integrity of the pants I 
was wearing, so when grandma told me she wanted to look at 
my crouch I would hunker down as low as I could go.  
   
    Look at that crouch just hanging down way too low.  You 
don't got anything at all that big up in there.  'cause you're 
wearing your crouch so low you getting chafed.  
   
    Yeah my thighs got pretty red just walking to the play 
ground and back. I think I need to rest them some more. 
   
    No son, you really need to get out and play.  Take a look at 
this. 
   
   Grandma handed me a pattern envelope.  Stretch and Sew 
was written in an exciting type face in bold pink.  Red orange 
and blue stripes cross the composition of the envelope. The 
summer clothing line for overweight children was being 
modeled by happy young chubby children with feathered hair, 
playing on the jungle gyms and hanging from the monkey bars. 
   
   My grandma was right, the children illustrated on the Stretch 
and Sew pattern looked intelligent, sophisticated and active.  I 
sort of identified with the child on the front with his arms 
akimbo like superman.  I did lay on the couch.  However, I 
imagined wile lying there watching cartoons, in between snacks, 
that if I ever did apply myself, I would be powerful. And maybe 
Grandma had something here. It wasn't  me that was the 
problem. It was my clothes that were holding me back.  I mean 
how can you conquer the playground if your cotton shirt is so 
soaked with sweat that it sticks to you like a sausage skin. There 
are no sausage skinned king of the monkey bars.  I would get 
out of my Huskies and into some Stretch and Sew.
   
   