Husky brings to mind a noble arctic dog with the spirit and power of a wolf, 
majestically running over a snowy, windswept lan dscape. This is exactly the w rong 
husky for ou r story. The husky I am referring to is corduroy or denim. Husky is a 
size. Husky was the name of Sears department sto res' largest size for young boys. 
There is no wolf like spirit here; the closest thing is sweaty armpits and chafed legs. 
Huskies were made from a treated fabric that would be pulled uncomfortably tight 
over pudgy frames. The fabric would resist staining. The fabric acted like a personal 
a drop cloth for fat kids. It would resist sp ills of coke, cool-aid, BBQ and pasta sauce, 
as they trail from the mou ths of over eag er eaters. Mothers can then simply wipe 
away the drops of sauce and dribbles, from these errant gobbles and chews. 
Huskies are for that s pecial type of American child, the one who ov erindulges, the 
glandular, the big boned. And it was to this weighty child's mother, that Sears 
marketed the clothing line. A mother buys Huskies for their child for practical 
reasons, not for aesthetic ones. And it is the child who must s uffer the indignity of 
the brand, or wear it with pride. This is the story of an unapologetic, heavyweight, 
Husky wearer, waddling over the landscape of a middle American town, above 
average in every way that is physically possible.  
Edwards is a street on the near south side of St. Louis. Missouri, a city founded in the 
late seventeen hundreds at the confluence of the Missouri and Mississippi rivers. Most 
 people who are not from there, associate it with Huck Fin and his raft. The city has 
several major league sports franchises, hockey, baseball and football, for which it is 
also widely known. 
St. Louis has large Catholic and Jewish populations that it owes to nineteenth century 
immigration from Italy, Germany an d Eastern Europe. The 'Louis' in St. Louis is 
often pronounced Louie by people living south of the the old Mason Dixon line. But 
none of the papists or Jews who actually live there would say Louie. The Catholics, 
Jews, and most everyone else who lives there, pronounce it  Louis, in a distinctly 
northern way. 
In the nineteenth century St. Louis was the fourth largest city in the United states. 
And during that gilded age the city was outfitted with beautiful public buildings and 
social resources as gifts from wealt hy philanthropists , like the St. Louis library, art 
museum, Forest Park and t he symphony orchestra. 
The worlds fair was held there in 1904 and transformed a large part of the city's rural 
areas into a world stage for the exhibition of the emerging modern world. 
When I was young my grandfather, Bud Whacker, used to tell me that just about 
every modern conven ience was invented at the 190 4 worlds fair. Inventions such as 
ice cream cone and the hotdog bun were believable, but the paperclip, the garden-hose 
and the can-opener, what's more, the car window roller-upper and roller-downer, the 
club sandwich and the toothpicks used to hold that invention together, seemed, to me, 
a bit too much. Think of some invention, anything, a soda bottle top or copper wire, 
for example, Grandpa would proudly say it was invented at the worlds fair.

The 1904 Worlds Fair left a powerful lasting impression on the city, a high wat er 
mark of cosmopolitan possibility and importance. 
The twentieth century was less kind to St. Louis . It saw its population slip to the 
ranks of the 52nd city in America. And far from b eing a world stage, it became more 
of a quaint museum, with a few bright spots of culture supported and protected from 
ubiquitous social ills and urban decline. 
This cultural St. Louis was a world physically close to Edwards street, in the south 
side of the city, but conceptually far afield from my world, which consisted of a two 
story converted duplex at 2015 Edwards. This two story building on a small lot in a 
dying city in the Midwest marks my origin. This building formed my original celestial 
sphere; a you ng boy's universe constructed of red brick. This small world of mine 
was situated in the littl e Italy section the city bordering both the Irish and Jewish 
quarters. 
For most of my young life there was just five people li ving at Edwards, my mother, 
sister, grandmother and grandfather and me. The Edwards house was built just after 
the Worlds Fair as were many of the buildings in the surrounding ethnic 
neighborhoods. The bricks of these b uildings wer e reclaimed from temporary 
structures used for the Worlds Fair exhibition. Some of the bricks were glazed with 
different colors and were smooth to the touch like s emi opaque ancient g lass. I have 
a lasting tactile memory of feeling the smooth glaz e on the b ricks of ou r house. The 
glazed bricks were gathered t ogether in batches of mismatched colors, like a 
 patchwork quilt over the buildings of the ethnic neighborhoods. These bricks often 
formed a beautiful color pallet that, I believe, was most elegantly demonstrated in t he 
 brick shed in the back yard of our Edwards house. 
The ethnic neighborhoods shared these glazed bricks as a meager but fitting famil y 
inheritance from the World's Fair. But t hat is perhaps just a small part of the Fair 's 
impact on these neighborhoods which were built in the shadow of the great 
exhibition. There was no shortage of colorful stories. St. Louisans called the Irish 
neighborhood dog town , and not out of some ethni c slight against the Irish. Rather, to 
hear my grandpa tell it, it's a ethnic slight against the Chinese. 
Grandpa maintained that a group a primitive Chinese people were displayed at the 
Worlds Fair. But the exhibitions ran out of money and they had to cut t he Chinese 
free, instead of sending them back home. 
 you know let them out of their cages. , Grandpa said 
 Cages, Grandpa? , I replied 
 OK maybe not cages but some sort of hu t or other kind of enclosure. The important 
thing is the fair organizers just l et them fend for themselves.  
 Now Greg,  Grandpa continu ed,  do you know what Ch inese people eat?  

 No Grandpa. Chines e food?, I said imagining s omething like cat food. 
 Chinese food!  Grandp a retorted, irritated by the tautology,  No, son, they eat 
dogs.  
 Dogs?  I answered qu izzically,  No they don't , grandpa. They co uldn't.  
 Yes, son, they would eat Rover or Spot. They eat dogs just as we eat pigs . And 
you'd probably eat the neighbors' dog too, if Grandma were late with your lunch.  
 Grandpa that's mean,  I complained but d eep down suspected it to be true. 
 So, as I was saying,  Grandpa continued, they let these Chinese guys go fend for 
themselves right in the city as if it was in their jungle home. 
 Back then things were different, the city did not have all these buildings and 
highways. They had just invented all that crap at the Worlds Fair so i t didn't quite 
circulate yet. 
 So these Chinese guys holed up in some trees and bushes right near where Paddy's 
 pub is now, on the south side of the park. 
 You know Paddy's, they got the burger you like.  
 yes, Grandpa, just near the park.  
 So they holed up there in some trees. But they were getting hungry and they didn't 
have no money, no Chinese money, or real money.  
 What did they do Grandpa?  
 They made arrows a nd bows out of stuff just l ying around,  Grandpa continued,  like 
from the trees and garbage. I g uess it was the head C hinese guy that had the plan. He 
was thinking, that if you give a man a fish he eats for a day. But the river was like 
seven miles away; and they didn't have fishing poles; they had arrows. So, the head 
Chinese guy instructs them to hunt dogs.  
 Dogs! How did they eat them? 
 The Chinese guys hunt them and then the Chinese ladies skin, and cook them.  
 But your not getting the story boy, Grandpa continued, now, somewhat frustrated, 
 This ain't a recipe, fatty. I am trying to tell you a story about ingen uity and hard 
work.  It's about the railroads, laundry and abou t those funny hats you see 'em 
wearing. 
Grandpa put his han ds to the corner of his eyes and and gave a big smile and said in 
an accent,  Ancient Chinese secret. 
 Ancient Chines e secret,  I parroted in reply. 
 Now, Greg, where do you think they found the dogs? , Grandpa questioned 
 pedagogically. 
 Dog houses, maybe,  I replied. 
 Yes, Greg, dog houses, in back yards, that's a good start. But are you going to feed 
the whole Chinese community that way.  
 No, I guess not,  I answered,  but maybe he's a big dog and he can feed a lot of 
them.   
 You ain't thinking boy,  Grandpa said, harshly correcting me.  You got to use 
strategy, like a general.  What is it that dogs want?  
 Bones, maybe?  I answered cautiously 
 Yes, bones , but what els e?  Grandpa as ked again. 
 Dog houses,  I answer returning t o my previous thought. 
 Get off that already, Greg. What dogs want are cats.  
 Cats, Grandpa?' 
 Yes cats,  Grandpa s tated authoritatively.  So wh at they do is, thes e Chinese guys 
stay holed up in those woods. Now they made their arrows. And remember, that 
they're half naked, mind you. Now these Chines e guys came on down here to little 
Italy we we live now.  
 Why's that?  I asked. 
 We'll you know how you r Grandma, is a Dego WOP. That's an Italian immigrant 
without papers. Get it W. O. P. ; with out papers . 
 Well, Greg, you know what Dego WOPs eat?  
 Spaghetti , I replied 
 No Greg, they eat roof-rabbits, or what we c all them in plain English, cats.  
 Oh, grandpa no, it can't be.  
 That's the honest truth , Grandpa continued.  These Chines e guys came down and 
stole some of the Dego WOPs' cats and used them for traps, to catch dogs.The Chinese tied the cats to a tree with transparent sausage casing, and waited on the 
dogs in the trees. The dogs were up-wind and get the smell of the cats. And then 
BLAM!  The Chinese shot the dogs with arrows.  
 The Chinese used the Italian's cats to trap dogs,  I said,  It all sounds so sad.  
 Now you got it, Son,  Grandpa said, patting me on the head.  it was a more barbaric 
time. And you know that created the longstanding mistrust between the Italians and 
the Chinese, that is, until the Irish moved in.  
Squirrel Highway 
So my childhood home was this red brick, two story building, built just after the 1904 
Worlds Fair. It was positioned on the east side of Edwards street, in the middle of a 
small city block. An alley ran along the s outh end of the house. The alley was like a 
country road misplaced in the middle of the c ity, a relic left parti ally paved with 
weeds and wildflowers growing 12 inches on either side. 
The two story house was remarkably small . Not even 30 feet from front door to back 
door, and less than 25 feet from side to side. It was originally intended to be 4 family 
flat, so it had two doors of the on the first and second floor. Each floor was cut into 
four pieces, which made four rooms, two bedrooms, a kitchen and a living room. 
Indoor plumbing and bathrooms were put in just before my grandparents moved in. 
The original intention of 4 families living in just two rooms a piece with no plumbing 
or bathrooms always seemed quite rough . Knowing that, some ho w, made this place 
seems like a castle, as our one family was living where 4 families had lived before. 
The building was tall and boxy. It had a flat roof. But it was certainly n ot square to 
 precision. The tall walls of the house seemed to be in a slow -motion sway, when 
viewed from the sidewalk. I am not sure whether this was an optical illusio n o f 
 perspective or poor craftsmen-sh ip, I suspect a bit of both. 
There were first and second story stone and concrete balconies, that ran the length of 
the front side of the house. They were merely three feet wide but each of the four 
front doors had access to them. The ornamental white sandston e was so soft, as 
children, we could easily clear out a gash after a 10 minutes of rubbing . Some times I 
would sit on the front porch soaking in the morning sun sitting next to my mother 
who was cat napping in a folding chair. I would sit and feel the sandy residue beneath 
my toes and working small indentation into the facade of the building. 
The only problem was that the second floor balcony by design or accident leaned 
toward the street, and and gave the impression that you could easily fall to the street 
 below. A three foot tall b lack metal railing was the only protection. I was often 
cautioned not to lean against the rai ling, heavy as I was, as it seemed to be loosely 
attached to the stone pillar s with rusty metal screws, some of which had already 
 broken free from the crumbling sandstone